# PostgreSQL Constraints

## Introduction
In this lesson we’ll work to build out a database (DB) schema that will store information for a conference. Our database will be designed to accept input from a variety of applications, user filled-forms, and other sources. We’d also like to put data validation in place to protect our DB from receiving unexpected, improperly formatted, or invalid data.

Luckily for us, PostgreSQL offers methods to safeguard a database and maintain data integrity. One of these methods is called constraints. Constraints are rules defined as part of the data model to control what values are allowed in specific columns and tables.

Specifically, constraints:
* Reject inserts or updates containing values that shouldn’t be inserted into a database table, which can help with preserving data integrity and quality.
* Raise an error when they’re violated, which can help with debugging applications that write to the DB.

Let’s work towards designing a data model we might use to schedule our conference. To start, we have the following tables with no constraints:
* talks
* speakers

In the next few exercises we’ll discuss how a thoughtful implementation of the following rules and constraints could improve our data model:
* Data types
* NOT NULL constraints
* UNIQUE constraints
* PRIMARY KEY constraints
* CHECK constraints
* FOREIGN KEY Constraints

## PostgreSQL Data Types
PostgreSQL offers several ways a DB engineer can ensure that correct data is entered into a column or table. One of the most basic methods is built into the CREATE TABLE syntax that you’ve probably already seen before.

In a CREATE TABLE statement we specify the data type for each column of a table (e.g., int, text, timestamp, etc.). In doing so, we’re telling PostgreSQL which types of values can be inserted into each column in the table. You can refer to the complete list of available data types in the [PostgreSQL documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/datatype.html).

| Name | Description |
| ---- | ----------- |
| boolean | true/false |
| varchar or varchar(n) | text with variable length, up to n characters (if specified) |
| date | calendar date |
| integer | whole number value between -2147483648 and +2147483647 |
| numeric(a, b) | decimal with total digits (a) and digits after the decimal point (b) |
| time | time of day (no time zone) |

To create a table that stores information about volunteers for the conference we could write the following:
```SQL
CREATE TABLE volunteers (
    id integer,
    name varchar,
    hours_available integer,
    phone_number varchar(12),
    email varchar
);
```

In the statement above, we’ve ensured that our volunteers table will have:
* Integer values for data in columns id and hours_available
* Text values data in columns name, phone_number, and email

However, data types don’t prevent all unexpected data from being inserted into a table. For example, we’ve defined phone_number as varchar(12) and might expect a 10-digit phone number formatted as XXX-XXX-XXXX. Consider the following issues that may arise:
* An incomplete value formatted like XXX-XXXX will be accepted because it’s under 12 characters.
* A value like +X XXX-XXX-XXXX will cause PostgreSQL to raise an error because it’s longer than 12 characters, even though it’s a valid entry.

Another potential issue caused by relying only on PostgreSQL data types stems from the fact that PostgreSQL will try to interpret incoming data as the data type the column has been defined as. This process, called type casting, can have mixed results.
* If one tries to insert 1.5 into our table’s hours_available column, PostgreSQL will cast this value to integer, round the data, and insert it into the table as 2.
* If one tries to insert 1.5 into the email column, PostgreSQL will insert this into the database by casting 1.5 to '1.5' even though '1.5' is not a valid email address.

## Nullability Constraints
In some cases, we might enter data into our database without including a value for every column in each row. For example, this could happen when aggregating data from multiple sources that don’t have the same input columns.

Missing (NULL) values in certain columns might make our data much less useful. For example, if we’re loading data into a table designed to keep a record of talks, we may want to require fields like title, session_timeslot, and speaker_id to be filled for an entry to be valid. After all, what’s a talk without a speaker?

Suppose we insert a row that doesn’t contain all desired fields into our current talks table. We can do this with the statement below.
```SQL
INSERT INTO talks (id, estimated_length)
VALUES (1, 30);
```

We can query this table to see how this row looks when inserted into PostgreSQL when there are no constraints in place.
```SQL
SELECT * FROM talks
WHERE id = 1;
```

| id | title | speaker_id | estimated_length | session_timeslot |
| -- | ----- | ---------- | ---------------- | ---------------- |
| 1 | NULL | NULL | 30 | NULL |

As expected, we see that there are NULL values in the title, session_timeslot and speaker_id columns. With PostgreSQL, we can choose to reject inserts and updates that don’t include data for specific columns by adding a NOT NULL constraint on those columns. With this constraint in place, PostgreSQL will reject the insert statement that contains incomplete data. PostgreSQL will raise an error alerting us that these rows violate the constraint and that our insert or update couldn’t be completed.

Let’s consider how we might implement this constraint on the talks table. If we know which columns cannot be NULL before creating our table, we can add a NOT NULL constraint following the datatype in the table’s CREATE TABLE statement.
```SQL
CREATE TABLE talks (
    id integer,
    title varchar NOT NULL,
    speaker_id integer NOT NULL,
    estimated_length integer,
    session_timeslot timestamp NOT NULL
);
```

Let’s try the previous insert again.
```SQL
INSERT INTO talks (id, estimated_length)
VALUES (1, 30);
```

Great, this statement now causes PostgreSQL to return an error.
```
ERROR: null value in column "title"  violates not-null constraint
Detail: Failing row contains (1, null, null, 30, null).
```

The error message lets us know our constraint is working! We even get a helpful message that shows information about the contents of the failing row.

## Improving Tables with Constraints
Sometimes we’ve planned out a data model and inserted data before realizing that our model could benefit from the addition of a constraint. In PostgreSQL, we can use ALTER TABLE statements to add or remove constraints from existing tables. In fact, all of the constraints we’ll cover throughout this lesson can be added to an existing table by writing an ALTER TABLE statement!

Let’s imagine we’ve already populated our talks table with some data, but we haven’t included any constraints. Suppose that:
* The column session_timeslot contains no NULL values
* The column title contains about 50% NULL values

Since we’ve already created and inserted data into our table, we probably don’t want to re-create and re-populate it from scratch. Instead, we can add a NOT NULL constraint to a column using an ALTER TABLE statement. Let’s add a NOT NULL constraint on session_timeslot with the following statement.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE talks
ALTER COLUMN session_timeslot SET NOT NULL;
```

If we later decide we no longer need this constraint, we can drop a NOT NULL constraint from an existing table with the following statement:
```SQL
ALTER TABLE talks
ALTER COLUMN session_timeslot DROP NOT NULL
```

If we’d like to add a NOT NULL constraint to the title column, we can attempt to do so using the same syntax we used to add a constraint on session_timeslot.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE talks
ALTER COLUMN title SET NOT NULL;
```

However, PostgreSQL will reject the addition of the constraint and raise the following error because NULL values are already present in the column. See the error the database returns below.
```
SQL Error [23502]: ERROR: column "title" contains null values
```

If the table we’re attempting to add a constraint on doesn’t meet the constraint, we can backfill the table so that it does adhere to the constraint. Backfilling is a term occasionally used in DB engineering to refer to the process of adding or updating past values. In this case, we can fill our target column’s NULL values with a placeholder value using the query below.
```SQL
UPDATE talks
SET title = 'TBD'
WHERE title IS NULL;
```

With the table updated so that there are no longer any nulls in title, and we can now apply the NOT NULL constraint.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE talks
ALTER COLUMN title SET NOT NULL;
```

## Introduction to Check Constraints
In some situations, we might want to establish specific rules to determine what makes a row valid. For example, In our talks table, we might want to ensure that the estimated_length column is:
* An integer
* NOT NULL
* Positive

The first two rules can be implemented with a data type and NOT NULL constraint respectively, but the third will require additional logic to enforce. We can use CHECK statements to implement more precise constraints on our table. A CHECK constraint can be written into a CREATE TABLE statement, or added to an existing table with ALTER TABLE.

To use a check constraint, we list CHECK (...) following the data type in a CREATE TABLE statement and write the condition we’d like to test for inside the parentheses.

The condition tested for inside of parentheses of a CHECK statement must be a SQL statement that can be evaluated as either true or false. These statements are similar to the statements you may be familiar with in WHERE clauses when filtering rows from a table. Let’s add a CHECK statement to ensure our talks table has a positive value for estimated_length for each row.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE talks 
ADD CHECK (estimated_length > 0);
```

In some situations, you may want to apply multiple constraints on a single column. In this case, we’d like to also add a NOT NULL constraint on estimated_length. We can add additional constraints on a column with multiple ALTER TABLE statements.

Alternatively, If we know the constraints we’d like to include as we’re creating a table, we can list following the column name and datatype in a CREATE TABLE statement. To implement the constraints we’ve covered in this lesson you could write estimated_length integer NOT NULL CHECK (estimated_length > 0) into the CREATE TABLE statement for talks.

## Check Constraints Continued
Inside a CHECK statement we can use a wide array of SQL syntax to create our conditions. For example, within our check constraint we can:
* Make comparisons between columns within the table
* Use logical operators like AND and OR
* Use other SQL operators you may be familiar with (IN, LIKE)

As a general rule, any logic that you might use in a WHERE statement to filter individual rows from an existing table can be applied within a CHECK, including logic that involves multiple columns or conditions. Suppose we’d like to add a check that all entries in talks have an estimated_length between 0 and 120 minutes. We could apply such a check with the following:
```SQL
ALTER TABLE talks 
ADD CHECK (estimated_length > 0 AND estimated_length < 120);
```

We can also apply constraints that apply to multiple columns. For example, suppose we want to enforce the following:
1. estimated_length less than 120 minutes
2. year of the talk should be 2020 (we can extract this value from session_timeslot)

We could do this by adding separate checks on each of the columns. Alternatively, we could add a single CHECK constraint that checks both conditions as shown below.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE talks
ADD CHECK (estimated_length < 120 AND date_part('year', session_timeslot) = 2020);
```

Don’t worry if you’re not familiar with this syntax, the date_part function in PostgreSQL just returns a portion of the date as an integer (e.g. date_part('year' ,'2020-08-01 00:00:00'::date) = 2020).

## Using Unique Constraints
When designing a PostgreSQL data model, it’s a good practice to structure tables such that rows are uniquely identifiable by some combination of attributes. Structuring your tables in this way leads to a few benefits:
* The structure of your data model and the contents of individual tables are more easily interpreted.
* Queries to access information from the table can be simpler. For example, if we’d like to query our attendees table to find out how many tickets an attendee has reserved, having a unique identifier for each attendee allows us to get a result without any intermediate aggregation.
* Identifying and implementing a PRIMARY KEY is easier on tables with UNIQUE constraints already in place.

In our attendees table, suppose that we’d like to make sure that no two people submit the same email address when they register. To do so we could apply a unique constraint on email.

To implement this constraint we could include it in our CREATE TABLE statement. To identify values in a single column as unique, we specify UNIQUE following the column name and datatype definitions, in this case we’d write email varchar UNIQUE in our CREATE TABLE statement.

Alternatively, we can add the constraint to an existing table using the following:
```SQL
ALTER TABLE attendees 
ADD UNIQUE (email);
```

Returning to our talks table, suppose we’d like to use the combination of speaker_id and session_timeslot to ensure that a speaker is never booked for multiple talks at the same time. We can do this in the CREATE TABLE statement by specifying the columns that need to be jointly unique in parentheses on its own line following the column names and datatype definitions. In this case, we’d add a UNIQUE (speaker_id, session_timeslot) on it’s own line in the CREATE TABLE statement.

Just as with single column unique constraints, we can also and add the constraint with an ALTER TABLE statement.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE talks
ADD UNIQUE (speaker_id, session_timeslot)
```

## Introduction to Primary Keys
Having unique constraints is useful, but an important part of building a relational data model requires defining relationships between tables. Primary keys are essential to defining these relationships.

A primary key is a column (or set of columns) that uniquely identifies a row within a database table. A table can only have one primary key, and in order to be selected as a primary key a column (or set of columns) should:
* Uniquely identify that row in the table (like a UNIQUE constraint)
* Contain no null values (like a NOT NULL constraint)

Implementing a PRIMARY KEY constraint is similar to simultaneously enforcing a UNIQUE and NOT NULL constraints on a column (or set of columns). Although UNIQUE NOT NULL and PRIMARY KEY constraints function very similarly, tables are limited to one PRIMARY KEY, but not limited in how many columns can have both UNIQUE and NOT NULL constraints.

In addition to defining relationships between tables, primary keys also improve your data model in several other ways:
* Many joins will use the primary key from one table to join data with another table
* Primary keys can improve query performance
* Primary keys help to enforce data integrity within a table by ensuring that rows can be uniquely identified

Recall that the attendees table has a column named id that uniquely identifies attendees. We have also already restricted the name and email columns to be NOT NULL“. Now let’s add id as our table’s PRIMARY KEY, we can do this with an ALTER TABLE statement.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE attendees
ADD PRIMARY KEY (id); 
```

Even with a primary key, there’s still good reason to use a combination of UNIQUE and NOT NULL constraints to enforce data integrity on other columns. In this case, the combination of a UNIQUE and NOT NULL constraint on email can be used to validate that all attendees have a value for email and each unique email can only be matched to one attendee.

Now that you’re familiar with how primary keys work, for the remainder of the lesson, you may assume that all tables in our data model have a primary key on their id column.

## Introduction To Foreign Keys
Let’s use some of what we’ve learned so far about primary keys to improve registrations. Recall the registrations table that we previously created had an id primary key column, and had fields attendee_id, session_timeslot jointly unique, so that no attendee may register for two talks with the same timeslot.

In this model, the talks in registrations are meant to reference the talks described in talks. Because of this, we’d probably want to ensure that any talk_id entered into registrations references an id that already appears in talks.

When discussing relations between tables, you may see the terms parent table and child table to describe two tables that are related. More specifically, values inserted into child table must be validated by data that’s already present in a parent table.

Formally, this property that ensures data can be validated by referencing another table in the data model is called referential integrity. Referential integrity can be enforced by adding a FOREIGN KEY on the child table that references the primary key of a parent table.

If the parent table doesn’t contain the data a user is attempting to insert, PostgreSQL will reject the insert or update and throw an error.

Let’s work through the example described above to improve registrations. In our example above registrations is a child table of talks because entries in registrations must reference the primary key from talks. Suppose talks also has a column named id as a primary key. Now, we can update our registrations table with a foreign key using the following statement.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE registrations
ADD FOREIGN KEY (talk_id)
REFERENCES talks (id);
```

Alternatively, if we’re creating a table from scratch, we can include the following line in the CREATE TABLE statement , FOREIGN KEY (talk_id) REFERENCES talks (id)

Suppose we now want to enter a registration for talk_id = 100, which does not yet exist in the talks table. Trying to insert a registration for this talk yields an error because there is not a corresponding entry in talks to reference yet. The error below lets us know the constraint is working and provides a helpful error message that indicates we need to add an entry to talks before this insert will succeed.
```SQL
INSERT INTO registrations VALUES (100, 1, '2020-08-15 9:00:00', 1);
```

```ERROR
SQL Error [23503]: ERROR: insert or update on table "registrations" violates foreign key constraint "registrations_id_fkey"
Detail: Key (talk_id)=(100) is not present in table "talks".
```

## Foreign Keys - Cascading Changes
In the previous lesson we discussed how foreign keys enforce referential integrity by preventing updates or deletes on the parent table until the child table is updated first. An engineer can specify the strategy PostgreSQL will use to maintain referential integrity as they define their foreign key constraint.

By default, a foreign key constraint will prevent an engineer from deleting or updating a row of a parent table that is referenced by some child table. This behavior is sometimes explicitly specified in a CREATE TABLE statement using REFERENCES talks (id) ON DELETE RESTRICT or REFERENCES talks (id) ON UPDATE RESTRICT.

However, another strategy you may consider is adding a CASCADE clause. Rather than preventing changes, CASCADE clauses (ON UPDATE CASCADE, ON DELETE CASCADE) cause the updates or deletes to automatically be applied to any child tables.

For example, suppose we’d like to set up our database to automatically unregister attendees from a talk that’s been cancelled. To do this we could apply ON DELETE CASCADE to our foreign key constraint.
```SQL
ALTER TABLE registrations
ADD FOREIGN KEY (talk_id)
REFERENCES talks (id) ON DELETE CASCADE
```

When we try to delete a value from talks, we also notice that all registrations for talk_id = 1 are removed as well. This preserves referential integrity by removing any row associated with this talk. To demonstrate, let’s first return the rows in registrations for talk_id = 1.
```SQL
SELECT * 
FROM registrations
WHERE talk_id = 1;
```

| id | attendee_id | session_timelot | talk_id |
| -- | ----------- | --------------- | ------- |
| 8 | 2 | 2020-08-15 9:00:00 | 1 |
| 9 | 5 | 2020-08-15 9:00:00 | 1 |
| 10 | 8 | 2020-08-15 9:00:00 | 1 |
| 11 | 9 | 2020-08-15 9:00:00 | 1 |
| 12 | 10 | 2020-08-15 9:00:00 | 1 |
| 13 | 11 | 2020-08-15 9:00:00 | 1 |
| 14 | 3 | 2020-08-15 9:00:00 | 1 |

Great, we observe 7 registrations for talk_id = 1 in registrations. Now, let’s use the following code to delete the talk with id = 1:
```SQL
DELETE FROM talks 
WHERE id = 1;
```

Because we’ve specified ON DELETE CASCADE on our foreign key, the DELETE statement ran successfully even though there were still rows in registrations that referenced talk_id = 1. Let’s check to see what affect this statement had on registrations.
```SQL
SELECT * 
FROM registrations
WHERE talk_id = 1;
```

| id | attendee_id | session_timelot | talk_id |
| -- | ----------- | --------------- | ------- |

As expected, records that correspond to talk_id = 1 have been removed. In effect, ON DELETE CASCADE runs the required deletes on the child table behind the scenes and allows the user to simply run a single command to update a data model.

## PostgreSQL Constraints Review
Great job, you’ve made it to the end of your lesson in PostgreSQL constraints and data integrity. Hopefully with this information you’re feeling more prepared to design data models that are robust and can handle all of the irregularities of data in the real world. Let’s quickly go over what we’ve learned.

Constraints are rules a DB engineer defines as part of the data model to gain more control over what values are allowed in specific columns and tables.

Specifically, Constraints:
* Reject rows containing values that shouldn’t be inserted into a database table, which can help with preserving data integrity and quality.
* Raise an error when they’re violated, which can also help with debugging applications that write to the database.

There are quite a few types of constraints:
* Data types — Are your first line of defense, these rules aren’t constraints but can help reject incorrect data from your database.
* NOT NULL constraints — Reject incoming rows from your table when critical information is missing from a row.
* CHECK constraints — Give you more control over what rules you’d like to apply to your tables. These constraints will allow you to reject a row if it fails the criteria you’ve defined.
* UNIQUE constraints — Help with defining unique values in a table, they also create an index which can improve query and join performance.
* PRIMARY KEY constraints — A column or combination of columns that uniquely identify a row and are both NOT NULL and UNIQUE. PRIMARY KEYs are unique to a table, and will often be used in joins between tables.
* FOREIGN KEY constraints — Allow you to maintain referential integrity between two tables by validating the entry in one also appears in the other. Referential integrity depends on FOREIGN KEY constraints.

In case you’d like more practice, here are some resources that may be helpful:
* [PostgreSQL Constraints Docs](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/ddl-constraints.html)
* [Codecademy Forums](https://discuss.codecademy.com/)
