# How to Make Sure My Database Stays Intact
# ACID Properties

## What is a transaction?
When working in a database, any single unit of work done to the database is defined as a transaction. These transactions can often be made up of multiple different steps, and most of the time represent changes made to the database. To reduce the number of errors that can occur when working with transactions, these transactions must maintain ACID properties. These ACID properties are rules that the transaction must follow. In this article, we will use the following as a representation of transactions for our examples:

| T1 |
| -- |
| Write(item1) |
| Write(item2) |
| Read(item2) |

A “write” in these examples could be something like an INSERT statement, while a “read” could be something like a SELECT statement.

## What Are ACID Properties?
When working with database transactions, ACID properties will more than likely be discussed. ACID is an acronym meaning Atomic, Consistent, Isolated, and Durable. These properties help ensure that all the data in a transaction is complete, accurate, and has integrity. These properties also assist in recovering databases in case of a system failure and allows for concurrent use of a database.

## An Atomic Database Transaction
The first property that we’ll discuss in this article is going to be the term atomic. The definition of atomic when discussing ACID properties, [according to IBM](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cics-ts/4.2?topic=processing-acid-properties-transactions), is “all changes to data are performed as if they are a single operation. That is, all the changes are performed, or none of them are.” This means that we treat each transaction as a single operation. If a single task in the transaction fails, then the entire transaction will fail. For example, let’s look at the following transaction.

| T1 |
| -- |
| Read(item1) |
| Write(item2) |
| Read(item2) |

If any of the steps in this transaction fails, then the entire transaction would fail. If we go through steps 1 and 2, and then step 3 fails, the entire transaction would fail and all the steps would be reverted to the original state before the transaction. In this case, that would mean that even though the writing of item 2 worked, that write would be reverted.

## A Consistent Database Transaction
In any database, certain rules can and will most likely be put in place to make sure that all of the data within it is valid, or consistent. Transactions must follow these rules in order to maintain consistency. [IBM defines consistency](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cics-ts/4.2?topic=processing-acid-properties-transactions) as “Data is in a consistent state when a transaction starts and when it ends.” This is a pretty vague definition, but will make sense once an example is displayed.

Inside of a banking application, whenever money is transferred from one account to another, we need to make sure that the no money was lost or added to the transaction. To do this, we would add the funds from both accounts together and store that value, transfer the money, then add the account values and check the initial value to make sure both are equal. This could be done like below.

| T1 |
| -- |
| Save(ac1 + ac2) as InitialValue |
| Transfer $20 from ac1 to ac2 |
| Check(ac1 + ac2 = InitialValue) |


These rules can be a number of different things, with some as simple as making sure that the primary index is unique for each row. Others can be more complicated, but no matter what these rules need to be followed for a transaction to maintain consistency.

## Isolation in a Database
When working with multiple transactions that could occur at once, it is important to ensure that when one transaction is reading or writing from a location in to a database, no other transaction is reading or writing from that same location. This process is called isolation and is [defined by IBM](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cics-ts/4.2?topic=processing-acid-properties-transactions) as “The intermediate state of a transaction is invisible to other transactions. As a result, transaction that run concurrently appear to be serialized.”

For example, if we had one transaction changing a row in a table, and another transaction trying to read data from that same table, these two transaction would not be able to operate at the same time. Instead, these transaction would execute one at a time. For example, let’s look at the following transactions.

| T1 | T2 |
| -- | -- |
| Read(item1) | Read(item2) |
| Write(item2) | Write(item3) |
| Write(item1) | Write(item2) |


If these two transactions were to occur simultaneously, problems could arise with item2. Even though T2 writes to item2 after T1, if everything executes faster in T2 than in T1, errors could arise from both transactions trying to write to item2 at the same time. Because of this, T2 would not execute until after T1 is finished executing.

This does not mean that we cannot perform multiple transactions at once. We can still have multiple transactions happen, it’s just that no two transactions can read or write from the same location at the same time. Otherwise, we could encounter issues where a transaction could use old data or a transaction could overwrite new data with old data.

## A Durable Database
When we talk about a transaction being durable, we will use the [IBM definition](https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/cics-ts/4.2?topic=processing-acid-properties-transactions) of durable which is “after a transaction successfully completes, changes to data persist and are not undone, even in the event of a system failure.” These failures include instances of service outages and crashes. Durability can be achieved through a number of methods including change logs that are referenced whenever the database is restarted for whatever reason.

## Conclusion
When working with a database, we know that when a transaction takes place the transaction needs to maintain its ACID properties. Those being Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability. While methods for implementing ACID properties into a database weren’t covered, knowing what this acronym is and the concepts behind each property is a good start!
