# Preventing Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) Attacks

# Preventing Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) Attacks

## Securing Cookies and Headers

### Securing Cookies
In the previous exercise, we saw how cookies can be used to steal user’s data. An express server that uses express-session to store cookies has the properties httpOnly and secure to configure how to store and send cookies. Setting httpOnly and secure to true helps mitigate the risk of client-side script accessing the protected cookie.

In order to set up a cookie in an Express server, you can use the library express-session to set up a session and configure the application with specific properties pertaining to cookies:
```JS
app.use(
  session({
    secret: "my-secret",
    resave: true,
    saveUninitialized: true,
    cookie: {
      httpOnly: true,
      secure: true
    },
  })
);
```

### Setting Security Headers
Moreover, we can include the [helmet package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/helmet) to edit HTTP headers. Helmet.js is a collection of 15 Node modules that interface with Express. Each module provides configuration options for securing different HTTP headers. One of them being the contentSecurityPolicy which is an added layer of security that helps to detect and mitigate certain types of attacks. Fortunately, by just including this package in your express app, 11 of these modules (including the content security policy module) will be configured automatically.

You can use helmet by adding the following line of code:
```JS
app.use(helmet());
```

## Data Validation and Sanitization
In the Reflected and Stored XSS Attacks, we saw how an attacker can inject malicious code into the server and/or database using a form. This is why it’s important to validate and/or sanitize data before it’s submitted to the server.

When we validate data we ensure that the user is not submitting information that doesn’t fit a certain format. Moreover, we can use sanitization in order to reformat data so no malicious code is sent.

In other words, validation checks if the input meets a set of criteria (such as a string contains no standalone single quotation marks), whereas sanitization modifies the input to ensure that it is valid (such as removing single quotes).

There are many packages that help validate user data, and one common package is [express-validator](https://express-validator.github.io/docs/). It’s built off of the validator package, and it is recommended for use in express applications. With express-validator, we can verify if a string matches a certain format by importing certain functions such as check:
```Js
const { check } = require("express-validator");
```

Once the function is imported, it can be used as a middleware within our endpoints, to validate any input that’s submitted within objects attached to req (such as data sent in a form through req.body):
```JS
app.post("/login", [
  check('email').isEmail(),
], (req, res) => {});
```

In the example above, the email field is sent through a login form and retrieved from req.body. Notice how we’re using an array since we can pass in multiple check‘s for input data.

If the input data is valid, then the rest of the request will be executed and we know that the data passed in is safe and properly formatted.

## DOM-Based Precautions
We know that, in DOM-Based Attacks, the malicious code is client-side. To prevent this attack developers must be very careful with the type of code used in the browser.

To be more specific, these types of attacks happen when data from a user-controlled source (like user name or redirect URL taken from the URL fragment) reaches a sink, which is a function like eval() or a property setter like .innerHTML, that can execute arbitrary JavaScript code.

There are several methods and attributes which can be used to directly render HTML content within JavaScript. If these methods are provided with malicious input, then an XSS vulnerability could result. For example:
```JS
// Attribute:
element.innerHTML = "<HTML> Tags and markup";
// Method:
document.write("<HTML> Tags and markup");
```

Instead, one can replace these methods with an attribute like textContent.
```JS
// Will add as an actual HTML element.
element.innerHTML = "<maliciousHTML>";
// Will render as text on the webpage.
element.textContent = "<displaysAsText>";
```

Ideally, one could take a step further and avoid rendering user input, especially if it affects DOM elements such as the document.url, document.location, or document.referrer.

Lastly, one should validate and sanitize all user input in order to prevent any data manipulation.
