# Preventing Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) Attacks

# Preventing Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) Attacks

## Adding CSURF to the App
csurf is an open-source library for implementing CSRF protection for Node.js. The module is maintained by the Express.js team and provides middleware functions to help our web application send and process CSRF tokens with web requests.

The CSRF module can be installed from the npm registry and installed using the terminal command:
```
npm install csurf
```

In the workspace, we have the code for a web application with an insecure web form. There are no security measures in place, leaving the web page vulnerable to CSRF exploitations. Throughout the rest of the lesson, we will be hardening (improving the security of) the webform by implementing CSRF tokens on the form.

## Setting Up Dependencies
The [csurf module](http://expressjs.com/en/resources/middleware/csurf.html) stores CSRF tokens within a cookie or in session. This requires either a session or cookie parser to be initialized first. If you are unable to store secrets securely on the server, it is preferred to store the CSRF token using a cookie. Throughout the lesson, we will store our CSRF token inside a cookie.

[cookie-parser](http://expressjs.com/en/resources/middleware/cookie-parser.html) is a module that is maintained by the Express.js team. The module can also be installed from the npm registry. The module can be included in the application using require():
```Js
const cookieParser = require('cookie-parser');
```

The Express application must be configured to use the cookie parser before the csurf module. Enable the cookie parser module in the application to work at the application level by including the following line early in the application code.
```JS
app.use(cookieParser());
```

Note: csurf can alternatively store the CSRF token value within a session. However, session management must be set up using express-session. 

## Configure CSURF
After including the dependencies for csurf, we can declare a variable named csrfMiddleware and create an instance of csurf.

When instantiating csurf we provide options to the cookie in order to configure the module to store the CSRF token secret in a cookie. For the module to work in the Codecademy environment, we must set the sameSite property equal to 'none'.
```JS
const csrfMiddleware = csurf ({
  cookie: {
    maxAge: 300000000,
    secure: true,
    sameSite: 'none'
  }
});
```

Additional options for the csurf instance can be viewed on the [documentation page](https://www.npmjs.com/package/csurf).

csrfMiddleware() can be configured at the router level using app.use() to call the middleware function for every request to the server with the following line in app.js:
```JS
app.use(csrfMiddleware);
```

## Making a CSRF Token
When configuring csurf using app.use, the functions and values are available on all Express get, post, and all routes. The middleware function is configured at the application level and will be called on each request so we won’t have to explicitly pass it to each route.

The csurf module provides the req.csrfToken() function to create a CSRF token. When the CSRF token secret is generated, it is passed to the client in the response and stored as a persistent cookie.

We can pass an object as a second argument to the render() function allowing the EJS template engine to use the CSRF token in the DOM of the client’s browser.

A CSRF token can be sent to an EJS template similar to:
```JS
app.get('/form', (req, res) => {
  res.render('formTemplate', { csrfToken: req.csrfToken() });
});
```

## Adding CSRF Token to Form
We’ve now set up the CSRF middleware on the backend and generated a CSRF token that will be stored on the cookie. In order to actually validate whether a token is valid, we need to make sure the CSRF token from the client is automatically submitted with the contents of the form. It is common practice to place the CSRF token as a [hidden \<input> field](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/input/hidden) within a form.

The name of the hidden \<input> should be named _csrf in order for the csurf module to extract the token value when the form is submitted.

We can use EJS templating syntax to set the value of the hidden \<input> to the CSRF token secret. We do that by using the property name of the object that is passed into the render() function.

A complete form example with CSRF protection looks similar to:
```HTML
<form action="/submit" method="POST">
   <input type="hidden" name="_csrf" value="<%= csrfToken %>" />
   <label for="body">Enter message: </label>
   <input id="body" name="message" type="text" />
   <input type="submit" value="Submit" />
</form>
```

Now, the CSRF token will be sent with the form data on submission. csurf will extract the CSRF token that is passed and compare it to the token that the server created. If the token value does not match, then CSURF will return an error.

## Error Handling
That’s it! The form is now protected from CSRF attacks with csurf. What happens in the case of an invalid CSRF token or none in a user request? CSURF will sense an error. It’ll respond with this ugly error message with a stack trace from the server:
```
ForbiddenError: invalid csrf token
   at csrf (/home/ccuser/workspace/csurftest/node_modules/csurf/index.js:112:19)
   at Layer.handle [as handle_request] 
…
```

To improve the error message, we can create a custom error message for invalid CSRF tokens. We do this by creating another middleware function to app.js using app.use() with four arguments: err, req,res, and next. We can check if there is an invalid CSRF token by checking if err.code is equal to 'EBADCSRFTOKEN', an error code defined by the CSURF module. If there is, we can return a response status of 403 with res.status(). Then use the res.send() function to send an error message describing the CSRF token mismatch.
```JS
app.use((err, req, res, next) => {
  if (err.code === 'EBADCSRFTOKEN') {
   res.status(403)
   res.send("The form was tampered with!")
  } else {
    next();
  }
})
```

Finally, if there is no error code, then we can continue using the next() function. Let’s add this error handling to our code!

## Exercises
```JS
const express = require('express');
const partials = require('express-partials');
const path = require('path');
const app = express();

const csurf = require('csurf');
const cookieParser = require('cookie-parser');

const PORT = 4001;

app.set("views", path.join(__dirname, "/views"));
app.set("view engine", "ejs");
app.use(partials());

app.use(cookieParser());

app.set('trust proxy', 1) 

app.use(express.json());
app.use(express.urlencoded({extended: true}));

app.use(express.static(path.join(__dirname, "/public")));

// Configuring CSRF
const csrfMiddleware = csurf({
  cookie: {
    maxAge: 300000000,
    secure: true,
    sameSite: 'none'
  }
});
  
app.use(csrfMiddleware);

// Check for CSRF error here
app.use((err, req, res, next) => {
  if (err.code === 'EBADCSRFTOKEN') {
    res.status(403)
    res.send('The CSRF token is invalid!')
  } else {
    next();
  }
});

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
  res.render('form', {csrfToken: req.csrfToken()})
})

app.post('/submit', (req, res) => {
  res.send(`<p>Post successful!</p> <p>CSRF token used: ${req.body._csrf}</p>`);
});

app.listen(PORT, () => console.log(`Listening on http://localhost:${PORT}`) );
```
