# Index
* [Introduction to Node.js](#introduction-to-nodejs)
* [Node.js Essentials](#nodejs-essentials)

# Introduction to Node.js

## The Console Module
One of the most commonly used Node.js core modules is the console module. In Node.js, the terminal is used to send and receive text feedback to and from a program, often for debugging purposes. This may sound familiar to how we use the console in the web browser. That’s because in Node.js, the built-in console module exports a global console object that gives the terminal similar functionality. The console object provides many of the same familiar methods such as:
* .log() — to print messages to the terminal.
* .assert() — to print a message to the terminal if the value is falsy.
* .table() — to print out a table in the terminal from an object or array.

Since console is a global module, its methods can be accessed from anywhere, and the require() function is not necessary.
```JS
const petsArray = ['dog', 'cat', 'bird', 'monkey'];

// Add console methods below!
console.log(petsArray)
console.table(petsArray)
console.assert(petsArray.length > 5)
console.log(petsArray.length > 5)
```

```
[ 'dog', 'cat', 'bird', 'monkey' ]
┌─────────┬──────────┐
│ (index) │  Values  │
├─────────┼──────────┤
│    0    │  'dog'   │
│    1    │  'cat'   │
│    2    │  'bird'  │
│    3    │ 'monkey' │
└─────────┴──────────┘
false
Assertion failed
```

## The Process Module
In computer science, a process is the instance of a computer program that is being executed. You can open Task Manager if you’re on a Windows machine or Activity Monitor from a Mac to see information about the various processes running on your computer right now. Node has a global process object with useful methods and information about the current process.

The process.env property is an object which stores and controls information about the environment in which the process is currently running. For example, the process.env object contains a PWD property which holds a string with the directory in which the current process is located. It can be useful to have some if/else logic in a program depending on the current environment— a web application in a development phase might perform different tasks than when it’s live to users. We could store this information on the process.env. One convention is to add a property to process.env with the key NODE_ENV and a value of either production or development.
```JS
if (process.env.NODE_ENV === 'development'){
  console.log('Testing! Testing! Does everything work?');
}
```

The process.memoryUsage() returns information on the CPU demands of the current process. It returns a property that looks similar to this:
```JS
{ rss: 26247168,
  heapTotal: 5767168,
  heapUsed: 3573032,
  external: 8772
}
```

Heap can mean different things in different contexts: a heap can refer to [a specific data structure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heap_(data_structure)), but it can also refer to the a block of [computer memory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_management). process.memoryUsage().heapUsed will return a number representing how many bytes of memory the current process is using.

The process.argv property holds an array of command line values provided when the current process was initiated. The first element in the array is the absolute path to Node, which ran the process. The second element in the array is the path to the file that’s running. The following elements will be any command line arguments provided when the process was initiated. Command line arguments are separated from one another with spaces.
```
node myProgram.js testing several features
```

```JS
console.log(process.argv[3]); // Prints 'several'
```

We’ve only covered a few of the properties of the process object, so make sure to check out the [documentation on the process object](https://nodejs.org/api/process.html) to learn more about it and explore some of its other methods and properties.

## The OS Module
When developing or debugging an app, it can be helpful to have information about the computer, operating system, and network on which the program is running. Before Node, this information could not be retrieved using JavaScript due to the language being confined to the browser. However, Node.js is a JavaScript runtime, which means it can execute code outside of the browser, and we’re able to get access to much of this information through the os core module.

Unlike process and console, the os module is not global and needs to be included into the file in order to gain access to it’s methods. You can include the os module into your file by typing:
```JS
const os = require('os');
```

With the os module saved to the os variable, you can call methods like:
* os.type() — to return the computer’s operating system.
* os.arch() — to return the operating system CPU architecture.
* os.networkInterfaces — to return information about the network interfaces of the computer, such as IP and MAC address.
* os.homedir() — to return the current user’s home directory.
* os.hostname() — to return the hostname of the operating system.
* os.uptime() — to return the system uptime, in seconds.

Let’s take a look at an example:
```JS
const os = require('os');
 
const local = {  
  'Home Directory': os.homedir(),    
  'Operating System': os.type(),
  'Last Reboot': os.uptime()
}
```

In the above example code, we first require the os module and store it in a variable, os. Below that, we have an object, local, that will hold some information about the user’s computer: the name of the home directory, the type of operating system, and the time since the computer was last rebooted.
```
  {
    'Home Directory': '/Users/luca',
    'Operating System': 'Darwin',
    'Time since reboot': 86997
  }
```

When we run the program, the local object stores all the requested information:
* the user’s home directory — '/Users/luca',
* the operating system — 'Darwin' ([Darwin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Darwin_(operating_system)) is the underlying operating system of macOS.),
* and the time since the computer was last rebooted — 86997 seconds.

Feel free to try running some of the os module methods on your own computer to get more information about the hardware, OS, and network you’re on!

## The Util Module
Developers sometimes classify outlier functions used to maintain code and debug certain aspects of a program’s functionality as utility functions. Utility functions don’t necessarily create new functionality in a program, but you can think of them as internal tools used to maintain and debug your code. The Node.js util core module contains methods specifically designed for these purposes. The util module can be required into the file using:
```JS
const util = require('util');
```

Once required, you have access to many useful objects and methods within the util module. One important object is types, which provides methods for runtime type checking in Node.
```JS
const util = require('util');
 
const today = new Date();
const earthDay = 'April 22, 2022';
 
console.log(util.types.isDate(today));
console.log(util.types.isDate(earthDay));
```

In the above example, we first require in the util module. Next, we declare two variables: today stores today’s date as an instance of the Date object, and earthDay stores the date of Earth Day as a string. We then log the results of type checking each variable using util.types.isDate(). The types.isDate() method checks for Date objects and returns a boolean value, giving us:
```
true
false
```

Since today is a Date object, it returns true, and since earthDay is a string, it returns false!

Another important util method is .promisify(), which turns callback functions into promises. As you know, [asynchronous programming is essential to Node.js](https://www.codecademy.com/content-items/9abb26ac5476a0967d2675d03fce444c). In the beginning, this asynchrony was achieved using error-first callback functions, which are still very prevalent in the Node ecosystem today. But since promises are often preferred over callbacks [and especially nested callbacks](http://callbackhell.com/), Node offers a way to turn these into promises. Let’s take a look:
```JS
function getUser (id, callback) {
  return setTimeout(() => {
    if (id === 5) {
      callback(null, { nickname: 'Teddy' })
    } else {
      callback(new Error('User not found'))
    }
  }, 1000)
}
 
function callback (error, user) {
  if (error) {
    console.error(error.message)
    process.exit(1)
  }
 
  console.log(`User found! Their nickname is: ${user.nickname}`)
}
 
getUser(1, callback) // -> `User not found`
getUser(5, callback) // -> `User found! Their nickname is: Teddy`
```

Here we have a function that queries a database for a specified user ID. getUser methods are very common in back-end applications, and most will also support error-first callbacks. Since a database query typically takes longer to run than other operations, we simulate the query with a setTimeout() method that executes a callback function after 1000 milliseconds (or 1 second). If the user with the specified ID is found, the callback function is executed with null passed in as the argument for the error parameter, and an object containing the returned user information is passed in as an argument for the user parameter. If the user is not found, the callback function is executed, passing in a new Error as the argument for the error parameter. A second argument for user is not necessary since the function will end in the case of an error.

This way of handling this function may seem a bit convoluted these days, but with .promisify(), we can easily change it into a modern, cleaner, and more maintainable version of itself:
```JS
const getUserPromise = util.promisify(getUser);
 
getUserPromise(id)
  .then((user) => {
      console.log(`User found! Their nickname is: ${user.nickname}`);
  })
  .catch((error) => {
      console.log('User not found', error);
  });
 
getUser(1) // -> `User not found`
getUser(5) // -> `User found! Their nickname is: Teddy`
```

We declare a getUserPromise variable that stores the getUser method turned into a promise using the .promisify() method. With that in place, we’re able to use getUserPromise with .then() and .catch() methods (or we could also use the async...await syntax here) to resolve the promise returned or catch any errors.

## Review
Awesome work! You’ve learned a lot about some fundamental Node.js concepts and modules. Let’s take a moment to review what we learned:
* Node.js is a JavaScript runtime, an environment that allows us to execute our JavaScript code by converting it into something a computer can understand.
* REPLs are processes that read, evaluate, print, and repeat (loop), and Node.js comes with its own REPL we can access in our terminal with the node command.
* We run JavaScript programs with Node in the terminal by typing node followed by the file name (if we’re in the same directory) or the absolute path of the file.
* Code can be organized into separate files, modules, and combined through requiring them where needed using the require() function.
* Core modules are built into the Node.js environment to efficiently perform common tasks.
* The console module exports a global console object allowing the terminal to act as a debugging console, similar to the JavaScript console object provided by web browsers.
* The process module is a global module that gives access to information about the Node.js runtime environment.
* The os module provides methods to retrieve information about the computer, operating system, and network interfaces.
* The util module contains methods used to maintain and debug your code.

You learned some of the key core modules built into Node.js, but as you know, there are many more. You can even create your own modules, as well as use third-party modules built by other developers. But don’t worry! A good thing to remember when learning Node is that it’s not necessary to memorize every module, method, or other specific aspects of the environment. The best way to get comfortable with Node is to practice making things with it. Your imagination is the limit! So keep going to learn how to download Node on your local machine.

# Node.js Essentials

## The Events Module
Node is often described as having event-driven architecture. Let’s explore what that means.

In traditional imperative programming, we give the computer a series of instructions to execute in a pre-defined order. In contrast, when we write web applications, we often need to write logic to handle situations without knowing exactly when they’ll occur. For example, when programming a website, we might provide functionality for a click event without knowing when a user will trigger it. When Node was created, it applied this same concept of event-driven principles to the back-end environment.

Node provides an EventEmitter class which we can access by requiring in the events core module:
```JS
// Require in the 'events' core module
let events = require('events');
 
// Create an instance of the EventEmitter class
let myEmitter = new events.EventEmitter();
```

Each event emitter instance has an .on() method which assigns a listener callback function to a named event. The .on() method takes as its first argument the name of the event as a string and, as its second argument, the listener callback function.

Each event emitter instance also has an .emit() method which announces a named event has occurred. The .emit() method takes as its first argument the name of the event as a string and, as its second argument, the data that should be passed into the listener callback function.
```JS
let newUserListener = (data) => {
  console.log(`We have a new user: ${data}.`);
};
 
// Assign the newUserListener function as the listener callback for 'new user' events
myEmitter.on('new user', newUserListener)
 
// Emit a 'new user' event
myEmitter.emit('new user', 'Lily Pad') //newUserListener will be invoked with 'Lily Pad'
```

## User Input/Output
If you’ve worked with JavaScript before, you’re likely familiar with the concept of input/output even if you haven’t heard it called that. At its most abstract, output is any data or feedback that a computer provides (like to a human user), while input is data provided to the computer. When we use console.log() we prompt the computer to output information to the console. In the Node environment, the console is the terminal, and the console.log() method is a “thin wrapper” on the .stdout.write() method of the process object. stdout stands for standard output.

In Node, we can also receive input from a user through the terminal using the stdin.on() method on the process object:
```JS
process.stdin.on('data', (userInput) => {
  let input = userInput.toString()
  console.log(input)
});
```

Here, we were able to use .on() because under the hood process.stdin is an instance of EventEmitter. When a user enters text into the terminal and hits enter, a 'data' event will be fired and our anonymous listener callback will be invoked. The userInput we receive is an instance of the [Node Buffer class](https://nodejs.org/api/buffer.html#buffer_buffer), so we convert it to a string before printing.

## The Error Module
The Node environment’s error module has all the standard JavaScript errors such as EvalError, SyntaxError, RangeError, ReferenceError, TypeError, and URIError as well as the JavaScript Error class for creating new error instances. Within our own code, we can generate errors and throw them, and, with synchronous code in Node, we can use error handling techniques such as try...catch statements. Note that the error module is within the global scope—there is no need to import the module with the require() statement.

Many asynchronous Node APIs use error-first callback functions—callback functions which have an error as the first expected argument and the data as the second argument. If the asynchronous task results in an error, it will be passed in as the first argument to the callback function. If no error was thrown, the first argument will be undefined.
```JS
const errorFirstCallback = (err, data)  => {
  if (err) {
    console.log(`There WAS an error: ${err}`);
  } else {
    // err was falsy
    console.log(`There was NO error. Event data: ${data}`);
  }
}
```

## The Buffer Module
In Node.js, the Buffer module is used to handle binary data. The Buffer module is within the global scope, which means that Buffer objects can be accessed anywhere in the environment without importing the module with require().

A Buffer object represents a fixed amount of memory that can’t be resized. Buffer objects are similar to an array of integers where each element in the array represents a byte of data. The buffer object will have a range of integers from 0 to 255 inclusive.

The Buffer module provides a variety of methods to handle the binary data such as .alloc(), .toString(), .from(), and .concat().

The .alloc() method creates a new Buffer object with the size specified as the first parameter. .alloc() accepts three arguments:
* Size: Required. The size of the buffer
* Fill: Optional. A value to fill the buffer with. Default is 0.
* Encoding: Optional. Default is UTF-8.
```JS
const buffer = Buffer.alloc(5);
console.log(buffer); // Ouput: [0, 0, 0, 0, 0]
```

The .toString() method translates the Buffer object into a human-readable string. It accepts three optional arguments:
* Encoding: Default is UTF-8.
* Start: The byte offset to begin translating in the Buffer object. Default is 0.
* End: The byte offset to end translating in the Buffer object. Default is the length of the buffer. The start and end of the buffer are similar to the start and end of an array, where the first element is 0 and increments upwards.
```JS
const buffer = Buffer.alloc(5, 'a');
console.log(buffer.toString()); // Output: aaaaa
```

The .from() method is provided to create a new Buffer object from the specified string, array, or buffer. The method accepts two arguments:
* Object: Required. An object to fill the buffer with.
* Encoding: Optional. Default is UTF-8.
```JS
const buffer = Buffer.from('hello');
console.log(buffer); // Output: [104, 101, 108, 108, 111]
```

The .concat() method joins all buffer objects passed in an array into one Buffer object. .concat() comes in handy because a Buffer object can’t be resized. This method accepts two arguments:
* Array: Required. An array containing Buffer objects.
* Length: Optional. Specifies the length of the concatenated buffer.
```JS
const buffer1 = Buffer.from('hello'); // Output: [104, 101, 108, 108, 111]
const buffer2 = Buffer.from('world'); // Output:[119, 111, 114, 108, 100]
const array = [buffer1, buffer2];
const bufferConcat = Buffer.concat(array);
 
console.log(bufferConcat); // Output: [104, 101, 108, 108, 111, 119, 111, 114, 108, 100]
```

## The FS Module
All of the data on a computer is organized and accessed through a filesystem. When running JavaScript code on a browser, it’s important for a script to have only limited access to a user’s filesystem. This technique of isolating some applications from others is known as sandboxing. Sandboxing protects users from malicious programs and invasions of privacy.

In the back-end, however, less restricted interaction with the filesystem is essential. The Node fs core module is an API for interacting with the file system. It was modeled after the [POSIX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/POSIX) standard for interacting with the filesystem.

Each method available through the fs module has a synchronous version and an asynchronous version. One method available on the fs core module is the .readFile() method which reads data from a provided file:
```JS
const fs = require('fs');
 
let readDataCallback = (err, data) => {
  if (err) {
    console.log(`Something went wrong: ${err}`);
  } else {
    console.log(`Provided file contained: ${data}`);
  }
};
 
fs.readFile('./file.txt', 'utf-8', readDataCallback);
```

Let’s walk through the example above:
* We required in the fs core module.
* We define an error-first callback function which expects an error to be passed as the first argument and data as the second. If the error is present, the function will print Something went wrong: ${err}, otherwise, it will print Provided file contained: ${data}.
* We invoked the .readFile() method with three arguments:
  1. The first argument is a string that contains a path to the file file.txt.
  2. The second argument is a string specifying the file’s [character encoding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Character_encoding) (usually ‘utf-8’ for text files).
  3. The third argument is the callback function to be invoked when the asynchronous task of reading from the file system is complete. Node will pass the contents of file.txt into the provided callback as its second argument.

## Readable Streams
In the previous exercise, we practiced reading the contents of entire files into our JavaScript programs. In more realistic scenarios, data isn’t processed all at once but rather sequentially, piece by piece, in what is known as a stream. Streaming data is often preferable since you don’t need enough RAM to process all the data at once nor do you need to have all the data on hand to begin processing it.

One of the simplest uses of streams is reading and writing to files line-by-line. To read files line-by-line, we can use the .createInterface() method from the readline core module. .createInterface() returns an EventEmitter set up to emit 'line' events:
```JS
const readline = require('readline');
const fs = require('fs');
 
const myInterface = readline.createInterface({
  input: fs.createReadStream('text.txt')
});
 
myInterface.on('line', (fileLine) => {
  console.log(`The line read: ${fileLine}`);
});
```
 
Let’s walk through the above code:
* We require in the readline and fs core modules.
* We assign to myInterface the returned value from invoking readline.createInterface() with an object containing our designated input.
* We set our input to fs.createReadStream('text.txt') which will create a stream from the text.txt file.
* Next we assign a listener callback to execute when line events are emitted. A 'line' event will be emitted after each line from the file is read.
* Our listener callback will log to the console 'The line read: \[fileLine]', where \[fileLine] is the line just read.

## Writeable Streams
In the previous exercise, we were reading data from a stream, but we can also write to streams! We can create a writeable stream to a file using the fs.createWriteStream() method:
```JS
const fs = require('fs')
 
const fileStream = fs.createWriteStream('output.txt');
 
fileStream.write('This is the first line!'); 
fileStream.write('This is the second line!');
fileStream.end();
```

In the code above, we set the output file as output.txt. Then we .write() lines to the file. Unlike a readable stream, which ends when it has no more data to read, a writable stream could remain open indefinitely. We can indicate the end of a writable stream with the .end() method.

## The Timers Module
There are times when we want some of our code to be executed at a specified point in time. This is what the [timers module](https://nodejs.org/api/timers.html#timers_class_immediate) is used for. Like the Buffer module, it is not necessary to use the require() import statement as the methods of the timer module are global.

You may already be familiar with some timer functions such as, setTimeout() and setInterval(). Timer functions in Node.js behave similarly to how they work in front-end JavaScript programs, but the difference is that they are added to the Node.js [event loop](https://nodejs.org/en/docs/guides/event-loop-timers-and-nexttick/). This means that the timer functions are scheduled and put into a queue. This queue is processed at every iteration of the event loop. If a timer function is executed outside of a module, the behavior will be random (non-deterministic).

The setImmediate() function is often compared with the setTimeout() function. When setImmediate() is called, it executes the specified callback function after the current ([poll phase](https://nodejs.org/en/docs/guides/event-loop-timers-and-nexttick/#setimmediate-vs-settimeout)) is completed. The method accepts two parameters: the callback function (required) and arguments for the callback function (optional). If you instantiate multiple setImmediate() functions, they will be queued for execution in the order that they were created.
```JS
setImmediate(() => {
    console.log('Hello! My name is Codey.')
});
```

## Review
Congratulations on making it to the end! Let’s take a moment to review the content covered in this lesson:
* Blocking code runs synchronously and non-blocking code, such as timer functions, runs asynchronously.
* Core modules are provided to developers to perform common tasks efficiently. Core modules are used by passing a string with the module’s name into the require() statement.
* We can make our own instances of the EventEmitter class, and we can subscribe to listen for named events with the .on() method and emit events with the .emit() method.
* Node allows for both output, data/feedback to a user-provided by a computer, and input data/feedback to the computer provided by the user. To handle errors during asynchronous operations, provided callback functions are expected to have an error as their first parameter.
* The buffer module provides global Buffer objects used to represent a fixed amount of memory that can’t be resized.
* The timer module provides functions that allow developers to execute callbacks at a specified point of time in the future.
* The Node fs core module is an API for interacting with the file system.
* Streams allow us to read or write data piece by piece instead of all at once.
