# Index
* [Your First React Component](#your-first-react-component)
* [Components and Advacned JSX](#components-and-advanced-jsx)
* [Creatn g a React App](#creating-a-react-app)

# Your First React Component

## Create a Component Class
You’ve learned that a React component is a small, reusable chunk of code that is responsible for one job, which often involves rendering HTML.

Here’s another fact about components: we can use a JavaScript class to define a new React component. We can also define components with JavaScript functions, but we’ll focus on class components first.

All class components will have some methods and properties in common (more on this later). Rather than rewriting those same properties over and over again every time, we extend the Component class from the React library. This way, we can use code that we import from the React library, without having to write it over and over again ourselves.

After we define our class component, we can use it to render as many instances of that component as we want.

What is React.Component, and how do you use it to make a component class?

React.Component is a JavaScript class. To create your own component class, you must subclass React.Component. You can do this by using the syntax class YourComponentNameGoesHere extends React.Component {}.

JavaScript classes and subclassing are a complex topic beyond the scope of this course. If you aren’t comfortable with them, here are some good resources to consult: 1 2 3 4.

Take another look at the code from the first exercise:
```Js
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
 
class MyComponentClass extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <h1>Hello world</h1>;
  }
}
 
ReactDOM.render(
    <MyComponentClass />, 
    document.getElementById('app')
);
```

A lot of it is still unfamiliar, but you can understand more than you could before!

On line 4, you know that you are declaring a new component class, which is like a factory for building React components. You know that React.Component is a class, which you must subclass in order to create a component class of your own. You also know that React.Component is a property on the object which was returned by import React from 'react' on line 1.

## Component Class Instructions
Let’s review what you’ve learned so far! Find each of these points in app.js:
* On line 1, import React from 'react' creates a JavaScript object. This object contains properties that are needed to make React work, such as React.createElement() and React.Component.
* On line 2, import ReactDOM from 'react-dom' creates another JavaScript object. This object contains methods that help React interact with the DOM, such as ReactDOM.render().
* On line 4, by subclassing React.Component, you create a new component class. This is not a component! A component class is more like a factory that produces components. When you start making components, each one will come from a component class.
* Whenever you create a component class, you need to give that component class a name. That name should be written in UpperCamelCase. In this case, your chosen name is MyComponentClass.

Something that we haven’t talked about yet is the body of your component class: the pair of curly braces after React.Component, and all of the code between those curly braces.

Like all JavaScript classes, this one needs a body. The body will act as a set of instructions, explaining to your component class how it should build a React component.

Here’s what your class body would look like on its own, without the rest of the class declaration syntax. Find it in app.js:
```JS
{
  render() {
    return <h1>Hello world</h1>;
  }
}
```
That doesn’t look like a set of instructions explaining how to build a React component! Yet that’s exactly what it is.

## The Render Function
A component class is like a factory that builds components. It builds these components by consulting a set of instructions, which you must provide. Let’s talk about these instructions!

For starters, these instructions should take the form of a class declaration body. That means that they will be delimited by curly braces, like this:
```JS
class ComponentFactory extends React.Component {
  // instructions go here, between the curly braces
}
```

The instructions should be written in typical JavaScript ES2015 class syntax.

There is only one property that you have to include in your instructions: a render method.

A render method is a property whose name is render, and whose value is a function. The term “render method” can refer to the entire property, or to just the function part.
```JS
class ComponentFactory extends React.Component {
  render() {}
}
```

A render method must contain a return statement. Usually, this return statement returns a JSX expression:
```JS
class ComponentFactory extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <h1>Hello world</h1>;
  }
}
```
Of course, none of this explains the point of a render method. All you know so far is that its name is render, it needs a return statement for some reason, and you have to include it in the body of your component class declaration.

## Render A Component
You have learned that a component class needs a set of instructions, which tell the component class how to build components. When you make a new component class, these instructions are the body of your class declaration:
```JS
class MyComponentClass extends React.Component
{ // everything in between these curly-braces is instructions for how to build components
 
  render() {
    return <h1>Hello world</h1>;
  }
}
```

This class declaration results in a new component class, in this case named MyComponentClass. MyComponentClass has one method, named render. This all happens via standard JavaScript class syntax.

You haven’t learned how these instructions actually work to make components! When you make a component by using the expression `<MyComponentClass />`, what do these instructions do?

Whenever you make a component, that component inherits all of the methods of its component class. MyComponentClass has one method: MyComponentClass.render(). Therefore, `<MyComponentClass />` also has a method named render.

You could make a million different `<MyComponentClass />` instances, and each one would inherit this same exact render method.

This lesson’s final exercise is to render your component. In order to render a component, that component needs to have a method named render. Your component has this! It inherited a method named render from MyComponentClass.

Since your component has a render method, all that’s left to do is call it. This happens in a slightly unusual way.

To call a component’s render method, you pass that component to ReactDOM.render(). Notice your component, being passed as ReactDOM.render()‘s first argument:
```JS
ReactDOM.render(
  <MyComponentClass />,
  document.getElementById('app')
);
```

ReactDOM.render() will tell `<MyComponentClass />` to call its render method.

`<MyComponentClass />` will call its render method, which will return the JSX element `<h1>`Hello world`</h1>`. ReactDOM.render() will then take that resulting JSX element, and add it to the virtual DOM. This will make “Hello world” appear on the screen.

# Components and Advanced JSX

## Use this in a Component
The word this gets used in React a lot!

You are especially likely to see this inside of the body of a component class declaration. Here’s an example:
```JS
class IceCreamGuy extends React.Component {
  get food() {
    return 'ice cream';
  }
 
  render() {
    return <h1>I like {this.food}.</h1>;
  }
}
```

In the code, what does this mean?

Once you have a guess, scroll down to see the answer.

…

…

…

…

…

…

The simple answer is that this refers to an instance of IceCreamGuy. The less simple answer is that this refers to the object on which this‘s enclosing method, in this case .render(), is called. It is almost inevitable that this object will be an instance of IceCreamGuy, but technically it could be something else.

Let’s assume that this refers to an instance of your component class, as will be the case in all examples in this course. IceCreamGuy has two methods: .food and .render(). Since this will evaluate to an instance of IceCreamGuy, this.food will evaluate to a call of IceCreamGuy‘s .food method. This method will, in turn, evaluate to the string “ice cream.”

Why don’t you need parentheses after this.food? Shouldn’t it be this.food()?

You don’t need those parentheses because .food is a getter method. You can tell this from the get in the above class declaration body.

There’s nothing React-specific about getter methods, nor about this behaving in this way! However, in React you will see this used in this way almost constantly.

this in JavaScript can be a difficult concept! Here is a good resource for understanding this in JavaScript.

## Use an Event Listener in a Component
Render functions often contain event listeners. Here’s an example of an event listener in a render function:
```JS
render() {
  return (
    <div onHover={myFunc}>
    </div>
  );
}
```

Recall that an event handler is a function that gets called in response to an event. In the above example, the event handler is myFunc().

In React, you define event handlers as methods on a component class. Like this:
```JS
class MyClass extends React.Component {
  myFunc() {
    alert('Stop it.  Stop hovering.');
  }
 
  render() {
    return (
      <div onHover={this.myFunc}>
      </div>
    );
  }
}
```

Notice that the component class has two methods: .myFunc() and .render(). .myFunc() is being used as an event handler. .myFunc() will be called any time that a user hovers over the rendered `<div></div>`.

# Creating a React App

## 1. Setting Up the Boilerplate Application
It is possible to manually create a React app, but Facebook has created a Node package [create-react-app](https://create-react-app.dev/) to generate a boilerplate version of a React application.

Besides providing something that works out-of-the-box, this has the added benefit of providing a consistent structure for React apps that you will recognize as you move between React projects. It also provides an out-of-the-box build script and development server.

We will use npx, a package runner tool that comes with npm 5.2+ and higher, to install and run create-react-app. This will ensure that the latest version of create-react-app is used.

Open up your terminal.
* If you’ve previously installed create-react-app globally via npm install -g create-react-app, it is recommended that you uninstall the package first. In your terminal run these commands:
  ```
  npm uninstall -g create-react-app
  npx create-react-app myfirstreactapp
  ```
* If you’ve never installed create-react-app before, you can simply run this command:
  ```
  npx create-react-app myfirstreactapp
  ```
* If you have Yarn installed, create-react-app will use it by default to create new projects. If you would prefer to use npm, you can append --use-npm to the creation command. It will look like this:
  ```
  npx create-react-app myfirstreactapp --use-npm
  ```
(Feel free to replace myfirstreactapp with whatever name you want, as long as it doesn’t contain capital letters :-))

Upon completion, you will get some quick tips on how to use the application.

