# Session Authentication in Express.js

# 3.2 Security-Related HTTP Headers

## Common Security Headers

Web security professionals should balance security and usability when deciding which ones to implement! Which security headers should one start with? We’ll discuss some of the most common ones.

### Strict-Transportation-Security
This header lets the server tell the browser that only the HTTPS version of the requested site is available. This enforces the use of HTTPS, which is encrypted compared to plain HTTP, ensuring that all communication between the client and the server occurs on a more secure transport layer.

This helps stops Man-In-the-Middle attacks. Let’s say someone is at a cafe using the shared wifi, accessing their bank website using HTTP instead of HTTPS. This means sensitive data coming from that device could easily be spied on, read, and even manipulated. If the bank’s web server includes the Strict-Transport-Security header in the HTTP response, the attack is much less likely to happen in this situation!

Here’s an example of the Strict-Transport-Security header:
```
Strict-Transport-Security: max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains
```

Let’s break it down:
* The includeSubDomains value tells the browser that the current site, including all of its sub-domains, is HTTPS-only.
* The max-age field tells the browser to remember this for the next year (31536000 seconds = 1 year), reducing redirect responses to the HTTPS version of the site in the future.

Learn more in the [MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Strict-Transport-Security).

### Content-Security-Policy
Content-Security-Policy defines an allowlist of sources of content. This restricts the assets that the browser can load while they’re on the current website. This can prevent Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) attacks, where scripts from sources outside the site are executed.

Here’s an example of the Content-Security-Policy header:
```
Content-Security-Policy: script-src 'self';
```

The script-src option restricts which resources JavaScript can be loaded from. The self value indicates that the browser should only run scripts from the current domain.

You can look into [more options for this header on Mozilla MDN Web Docs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CSP).

### X-Frame-Options
This header stops the current page from being hidden in an \<iframe> tag in another site’s HTML. This helps prevent [clickjacking](https://owasp.org/www-community/attacks/Clickjacking); a situation where an attacker loads your webpage in an iframe, hides the iframe using CSS, and tricks a user into unknowingly clicking on and sending a request to your webpage.

Here are some examples of the X-Frame-Options header that help prevent this type of attack:
```
X-Frame-Options: DENY
```

means your page can’t be hidden in an iframe anywhere, whereas
```
X-Frame-Options: SAMEORIGIN
```

only allows this page to be put into an iframe within your own domain.
```
X-Frame-Options: ALLOW-FROM https://example.com
```

lets you list sites that are allowed to put the current content in an iframe.

## More Headers & Resources
Some other common headers include:
* [X-Content-Type-Options](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Content-Type-Options)
* [Referrer-Policy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Referrer-Policy)

Additional Resources on security headers:
* [OWASP HTTP Security Headers Guide](http://owasp.org/www-project-secure-header)
* [Mozilla resource on HTTP security-related headers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers#security)

## How to Add Security Headers
Headers can be added and removed in configuration files for servers. Below, we add the same header on three common types of servers: nginx, Apache, and Windows.

### nginx
The following line is added to an nginx server’s config file to add the Strict-Transport-Security header to all HTTP responses.
```
add_header strict-transport-security 'max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains always;'
```

For more details, here is an [nginx guide to adding the Strict-Transport-Security header](https://www.nginx.com/blog/http-strict-transport-security-hsts-and-nginx/), which you can also use as a guide for adding other headers.

### Apache:
To add the Strict-Transport-Security header, you can add the following line to Apache server’s config file located at /etc/httpd/conf/httpd.conf:
```
Header always set Strict-Transport-Security "max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains"
```

### Microsoft IIS
If you use Windows IIS, you can add security headers in your the Web.config file’s <httpProtocol> section like so:
```
<system.webServer>
  ...
 
  <httpProtocol>
    <customHeaders>
      <add name="Content-Security-Policy" value="default-src 'self';" />
    </customHeaders>
  </httpProtocol>
 
  ...
</system.webServer>
```

### Checking Security Headers
You can use [https://securityheaders.com/](https://securityheaders.com/) to check which headers are active on your web address.

## Conclusion
Security headers allow you to customize your web application’s security policy! They are an important line of defense against web attacks. You should research each header, different options for each, and find out how they can improve security while maintaining usability.
