# Intro to Data Structures
# Why Data Structure?

## How are data structures used?

Data structures handle four main functions for us:
* Inputting information
* Processing information
* Maintaining information
* Retrieving information

Inputting is largely concerned with how the data is received. What kind of information can be included? Will the new data be added to the beginning, end, or somewhere in the middle of the existing data? Does an existing point of data need to be updated or destroyed?

Processing gets at the way that data is manipulated in the data structure. This can occur concurrently or as a result of other processes that data structures handle. How does existing data that has been stored need to change to accommodate new, updated, or removed data?

Maintaining is focused on how the data is organized within the structure. Which relationships need to be maintained between pieces of data? How much memory must the system reserve (allocate) to accommodate the data?

Retrieving is devoted to finding and returning the data that is stored in the structure. How can we access that information again? What steps does the data structure need to take to get the information back to us?

## Choosing the best data structure
1. What is the intended purpose for the data? Do any data structures have built-in functionality that is ideally suited for this purpose? Do you want to search, sort, or iterate data in a way in which certain data structures would be better suited than others?
2. Do you want or need control over how memory is set aside to store your data? Data structures that use static memory allocation (e.g., stacks or arrays) will manage memory for you and assume a fixed amount of memory upon instantiation with a cap on how much data may be added. Data structures that utilize dynamic memory allocation (e.g., heaps or linked lists) allow you to allocate and reallocate memory within the life of the program. While memory allocation is not something that you’ll need to consider in languages like Python or Javascript (these languages will manage memory for you, regardless of which data structure you use), it is something to bear in mind when working in other languages like C.
3. How long will it take different data structures to accomplish various tasks relative to other data structures? Technically, two data structures may both be able to accomplish the same task for you, but one may be quite a bit faster. This consideration, known as runtime will be covered further in depth when you explore all the nifty tricks of asymptotic notation.
