# Nodes
# Nodes: JavaScript

## Introduction: Nodes in JavaScript

Now that you have an understanding of what nodes are, let’s see one way they can be implemented using Javascript.

We will create a basic node that contains data and one link to another node. The node’s data will be specified when creating the node and immutable (can’t be updated). Remember that a node’s link to the next node is null when there are no nodes to traverse.

Go ahead and take a look at the starter code in the editor. You will find the Node class defined. module.exports allows the Node class to be used outside this module. Make sure to always leave this line of code. We’ll need it when we use this class to implement more complex data structures.

### Exercises
1. Let’s begin by setting up the constructor for our Node class. Since nodes contain data, we want the constructor to expect a data argument of any type to be passed in. The constructor can assign the given argument to the data property of the Node instance.

    Be sure to set the arguments to the appropriate properties in this class (i.e. this.data).
2. Let’s check that our Node class has the correct data.

    Underneath the Node class, instantiate a Node with any value and set it to firstNode. Then use console.log() to print out the instance’s data property. We should see the value that the node was instantiated with in the terminal.
3. We also know that a node is aware of the other node it links to. We will represent this with the next property on the Node class.

    Similar to how we created the data property in the constructor, let’s do the same with the next node property. When the node is first created, it is an orphan node (a node with no links). Set the next node to null.
4. Let’s check that next node property was successfully set in the constructor.

    Underneath the node we previously created, use console.log() to print out the instance’s next node property. Check that null is output in the terminal.

```JS
class Node {
  // 1.
  constructor(data) {
    this.data = data;
    // 3.
    this.next = null;
  }
}

// 2.
const firstNode = new Node('First Node Instance');
console.log(firstNode.data);
// 4.
console.log(firstNode.next);

module.exports = Node;
```
```
First Node Instance
null
```

## Node Methods: Set Next Node

Currently when a node is created, the next node is initially set to null, and we do not have a formal way to change it. However, we want to allow the next node to be updated so it can be traversed and used in more complex data structures. For this, we will use a setter to modify this.next node property.

### Exercises
1. Implement the .setNextNode() method in the Node class.

    It should take node as an argument and update the next node property appropriately.
2. To verify that our .setNextNode() performs as intended, let’s call the method on our Node instance. Create a second Node instance and set it to secondNode. Link it to the firstNode by passing secondNode to the call to setNextNode.

    Now let’s print out firstNode so we can see it in its entirety using console.log(). We should see the second node instance set to the next node property instead of the default null value.
```JS
class Node {
  constructor(data) {
    this.data = data;
    this.next = null;
  }

  // 1.
  setNextNode(node) {
    this.next = node;
  }
}

const firstNode = new Node('I am an instance of a Node!');
// 2.
const secondNode = new Node('I am an instance of a Node!');
firstNode.setNextNode(secondNode);
console.log(firstNode.next);

module.exports = Node;
```
```
Node { data: 'I am an instance of a Node!', next: null }
```

## Node Methods: Set Next Node Validation

We arbitrarily set our next node to any argument that gets passed in. This can be problematic. Imagine if the next node accidentally gets set to a different data type, like a string. We run the risk of mistakenly confusing the string for a node, and we would have to build out special support to avoid traversing anything that is not a node.

To prevent these unnecessary complications, let’s add in a check that only allows arguments that are instanceof nodes or null. We want to allow null values as an argument in the event that we want to break the link between a node and its next node.

### Exercises
1. Inside .setNextNode(), check if the node argument is an instanceof the Node class. If the argument is a Node or null, set this.next equal to node. Otherwise, throw an error.
2. We know that we can set the next node to another node, so let’s verify that .setNextNode() will not accept an argument that is not a node.

    Call the .setNextNode() method on our Node instance and pass it any argument that is not a node. We expect to see an error in the terminal because you didn’t set the next node to a Node instance.
```JS
class Node {
  constructor(data) {
    this.data = data;
    this.next = null;
  }

  setNextNode(node) {
    // 1.
    if (node instanceof Node || node === null) {
      this.next = node;
    } else {
      throw new Error('Its not a Node');
    }
  }
}

const firstNode = new Node('I am an instance of a Node!');
// 2.
firstNode.setNextNode('String')

module.exports = Node;
```
```
set-next-node-validation/Node.js:12
      throw new Error('Its not a Node');
      ^

Error: Its not a Node
```

## Node Methods: Get Next Node

We could continue accessing the next node property directly, like how we have been doing so far. However, if we ever want it to be given in a special way, we would want to use a getter to handle the preprocessing.

Let’s go ahead and create a simple .getNextNode() method that just returns the next node property.

### Exercises
1. Implement the .getNextNode() method in the Node class.
2. Using the Node instance that we have already created, verify that the .getNextNode() method returns the correct next node property by logging the call from firstNode.
```JS
class Node {
  constructor(data) {
    this.data = data;
    this.next = null;
  }

  setNextNode(node) {
    if (node instanceof Node || node === null) {
      this.next = node;
    } else {
      throw new Error('Next node must be a member of the Node class.');
    }
  }
  // 1.
  getNextNode() {
    return this.next;
  }
}

const firstNode = new Node('I am an instance of a Node!');
const secondNode = new Node('I am the next Node!');
firstNode.setNextNode(secondNode);
// 2.
console.log(firstNode.getNextNode())

module.exports = Node;
```
```
Node { data: 'I am the next Node!', next: null }
```

## Review: Nodes in JavaScript

Let’s see all of our Node class methods together in action!

Imagine we are working at an ice cream shop that sells three flavors: strawberry, vanilla, and coconut. The signature sundae is made of these three flavors, but our new hires have a hard time remembering the order.

To help them remember, our JavaScript nodes may do just the trick. Let’s get started…

### Exercises
1. Outside of Node, instantiate three more nodes.
    * The first will represent our strawberry ice cream with the name, 'Berry Tasty'. Assign it to the variable, strawberryNode
    * The second will represent our vanilla ice cream with the value, 'Vanilla'. Assign it to the variable, vanillaNode
    * The third will represent our coconut ice cream with the value, 'Coconuts for Coconut'. Assign it to the variable, coconutNode
2. Now let’s put these ice cream nodes in order. vanilla goes first, followed by strawberry. Finally, coconut goes after strawberry.

    Below the newly created nodes, use your .setNextNode() method so that:
      * strawberryNode is the next node of vanillaNode
      * coconutNode the next node of strawberryNode
3. Let’s walk through our ice cream nodes to make sure that they are linked in the correct order. Create a new currentNode and set it vanillaNode. We will use currentNode to iterate through the nodes, so declare it using let. Create a while loop that will only iterate when the currentNode is not null.

    Inside the while loop, log out the currentNode’s data, and update currentNode to the next node.

    We should see the ice cream flavors in order of vanilla, strawberry, and coconut in the terminal.

    When your code is passing, take a moment to consider:
      * What other ways do you think nodes could be helpful for keeping track of and storing information?
      * What could happen if we added another link to the Node class?
      * What if we created an instance of a Node with another Node instance?
```JS
class Node {
  constructor(data) {
    this.data = data;
    this.next = null;
  }

  setNextNode(node) {
    if (node instanceof Node || node === null) {
      this.next = node;
    } else {
      throw new Error('Next node must be a member of the Node class.');
    }
  }

  getNextNode() {
    return this.next;
  }
}
// 1.
const strawberryNode = new Node('Berry Tasty');
const vanillaNode = new Node('Vanilla');
const coconutNode = new Node('Coconuts for Coconut');
// 2.
vanillaNode.setNextNode(strawberryNode);
strawberryNode.setNextNode(coconutNode);
// 3.
let currentNode = vanillaNode;
while (currentNode !== null) {
  console.log(currentNode.data);
  currentNode = currentNode.getNextNode();
}

module.exports = Node;
```
```
Vanilla
Berry Tasty
Coconuts for Coconut
```
