# Index
* [this.props](#thisprops)
* [this.state](#thisstate)

# this.props

## Access a Component's props
Every component has something called props.

A component’s props is an object. It holds information about that component.

To see a component’s props object, you use the expression this.props. Here’s an example of this.props being used inside of a render method:
```JS
render() {
  console.log("Props object comin' up!");
 
  console.log(this.props);
 
  console.log("That was my props object!");
 
  return <h1>Hello world</h1>;
}
```

Most of the information in this.props is pretty useless! But some of it is extremely important, as you’ll see.

## Pass `props` to a Component
You can pass information to a React component.

How? By giving that component an attribute:
```JS
<MyComponent foo="bar" />
```

Let’s say that you want to pass a component the message, "This is some top secret info.". Here’s how you could do it:
```Js
<Example message="This is some top secret info." />
```

As you can see, to pass information to a component, you need a name for the information that you want to pass.

In the above example, we used the name message. You can use any name you want.

If you want to pass information that isn’t a string, then wrap that information in curly braces. Here’s how you would pass an array:
```JS
<Greeting myInfo={["top", "secret", "lol"]} />
```

In this next example, we pass several pieces of information to <Greeting />. The values that aren’t strings are wrapped in curly braces:
```Js
<Greeting name="Frarthur" town="Flundon" age={2} haunted={false} />
```

## Render a Component's props
You just passed information to a component’s props object!

You will often want a component to display the information that you pass.

Here’s how to make a component display passed-in information:

1 - Find the component class that is going to receive that information.
2 - Include this.props.name-of-information in that component class’s render method’s return statement.

```JS
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';

class Greeting extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <h1>Hi there, {this.props.firstName}!</h1>;
  }
}

ReactDOM.render(
  <Greeting firstName='John' />, 
  document.getElementById('app')
);
```

## Pass props From Component To Component
You have learned how to pass a prop to a component:
```JS
<Greeting firstName="Esmerelda" />
```

You have also learned how to access and display a passed-in prop:
```JS
render() {
  return <h1>{this.props.firstName}</h1>;
}
```

The most common use of props is to pass information to a component, from a different component. You haven’t done that yet, but it’s very similar to what you’ve seen already.

In this exercise, you will pass a prop from one component to another.

<b>A curmudgeonly clarification about grammar:</b>
You may have noticed some loose usage of the words prop and props. Unfortunately, this is pretty inevitable.

props is the name of the object that stores passed-in information. this.props refers to that storage object. At the same time, each piece of passed-in information is called a prop. This means that props could refer to two pieces of passed-in information, or it could refer to the object that stores those pieces of information :(

## Render Different UI Based on props
Awesome! You passed a prop from a component to a different component, accessed that prop from the receiver component, and rendered it!

You can do more with props than just display them. You can also use props to make decisions.

In the code editor, look at the Welcome component class.

You can tell from this.props.name on line 5 that Welcome expects to receive a piece of information called name. However, Welcome never renders this piece of information! Instead, it uses the information to make a decision.

`<Welcome />` instances will render the text WELCOME "2" MY WEB SITE BABYYY!!!!!, unless the user is Mozart, in which case they will render the more respectful
hello sir it is truly great to meet you
here on the web.

The passed-in name is not displayed in either case! The name is used to decide what will be displayed. This is a common technique.

Select Home.js and look at the Home component class. What will `<Welcome />` render to the screen?
```JS
import React from 'react';

export class Welcome extends React.Component {
  render() {
    if (this.props.name === 'Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart') {
      return (
      	<h2>
      	  hello sir it is truly great to meet you here on the web
      	</h2>
      );
    } else {
      return (
      	<h2>
      	  WELCOME "2" MY WEB SITE BABYYY!!!!!
      	</h2>
      );
    }
  }
}
```

## Put an Event Handler in a Component Class
You can, and often will, pass functions as props. It is especially common to pass event handler functions.

In the next lesson, you will pass an event handler function as a prop. However, you have to define an event handler before you can pass one anywhere. In this lesson, you will define an event handler function.

How do you define an event handler in React?

You define an event handler as a method on the component class, just like the render method.

Take a look in the code editor. On lines 4 through 8, an event handler method is defined, with similar syntax as the render method. On line 12, that event handler method is attached to an event (a click event, in this case).
```JS
import React from 'react';

class Example extends React.Component {
  handleEvent() {
    alert(`I am an event handler.
      If you see this message,
      then I have been called.`);
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <h1 onClick={this.handleEvent}>
        Hello world
      </h1>
    );
  }
}
```

## Pass an Event Handler as a prop
Good! You’ve defined a new method on the Talker component class. Now you’re ready to pass that function to another component.

You can pass a method in the exact same way that you pass any other information. Behold, the mighty JavaScript.
```JS
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
import { Button } from './Button';

class Talker extends React.Component {
  handleClick() {
    let speech = '';
    for (let i = 0; i < 10000; i++) {
      speech += 'blah ';
    }
    alert(speech);
  }
  
  render() {
    return <Button onClick={this.handleClick} />;
  }
}

ReactDOM.render(
  <Talker />,
  document.getElementById('app')
);
```

## Receive an Event Handler as a prop
Great! You just passed a function from `<Talker />` to `<Button />`.

In the code editor, select Button.js. Notice that Button renders a `<button></button>` element.

If a user clicks on this `<button></button>` element, then you want your passed-in talk function to get called.

That means that you need to attach talk to the `<button></button>` as an event handler.

How do you do that? The same way that you attach any event handler to a JSX element: you give that JSX element a special attribute. The attribute’s name should be something like onClick or onHover. The attribute’s value should be the event handler that you want to attach.
`Button.js`
```JS
import React from 'react';

export class Button extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return (
      <button onClick={this.props.onClick}>
        Click me!
      </button>
    );
  }
}
```
`Talker.js`
```JS
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
import { Button } from './Button';

class Talker extends React.Component {
  handleClick() {
    let speech = '';
    for (let i = 0; i < 10000; i++) {
      speech += 'blah ';
    }
    alert(speech);
  }
  
  render() {
    return <Button onClick={this.handleClick} />;
  }
}

ReactDOM.render(
  <Talker />,
  document.getElementById('app')
);
```

## handleEvent, onEvent, and this.props.onEvent
Let’s talk about naming things.

When you pass an event handler as a prop, as you just did, there are two names that you have to choose.

Both naming choices occur in the parent component class - that is, in the component class that defines the event handler and passes it.

The first name that you have to choose is the name of the event handler itself.

Look at Talker.js, lines 6 through 12. This is our event handler. We chose to name it talk.

The second name that you have to choose is the name of the prop that you will use to pass the event handler. This is the same thing as your attribute name.

For our prop name, we also chose talk, as shown on line 15:
```JS
return <Button talk={this.talk} />;
```

These two names can be whatever you want. However, there is a naming convention that they often follow. You don’t have to follow this convention, but you should understand it when you see it.

Here’s how the naming convention works: first, think about what type of event you are listening for. In our example, the event type was “click.”

If you are listening for a “click” event, then you name your event handler handleClick. If you are listening for a “keyPress” event, then you name your event handler handleKeyPress:
```JS
class MyClass extends React.Component {
  handleHover() {
    alert('I am an event handler.');
    alert('I will be called in response to "hover" events.');
  }
}
```

Your prop name should be the word on, plus your event type. If you are listening for a “click” event, then you name your prop onClick. If you are listening for a “keyPress” event, then you name your prop onKeyPress:
```JS
class MyClass extends React.Component {
  handleHover() {
    alert('I am an event handler.');
    alert('I will listen for a "hover" event.');
  }
 
  render() {
    return <Child onHover={this.handleHover} />;
  }
}
```

## this.props.children
Every component’s props object has a property named children.

this.props.children will return everything in between a component’s opening and closing JSX tags.

So far, all of the components that you’ve seen have been self-closing tags, such as `<MyComponentClass />`. They don’t have to be! You could write `<MyComponentClass></MyComponentClass>`, and it would still work.

this.props.children would return everything in between `<MyComponentClass>` and `</MyComponentClass>`.

Look at BigButton.js. In Example 1, `<BigButton>`‘s this.props.children would equal the text, “I am a child of BigButton.”

In Example 2, `<BigButton>`‘s this.props.children would equal a `<LilButton />` component.

In Example 3, `<BigButton>`‘s this.props.children would equal undefined.

If a component has more than one child between its JSX tags, then this.props.children will return those children in an array. However, if a component has only one child, then this.props.children will return the single child, not wrapped in an array.
```JS
import React from 'react';
import { LilButton } from './LilButton';

class BigButton extends React.Component {
  render() {
    console.log(this.props.children);
    return <button>Yo I am big</button>;
  }
}


// Example 1
<BigButton>
  I am a child of BigButton.
</BigButton>


// Example 2
<BigButton>
  <LilButton />
</BigButton>


// Example 3
<BigButton />
```

## defaultProps
Take a look at the Button component class.

Notice that on line 8, Button expects to receive a prop named text. The received text will be displayed inside of a <button></button> element.

What if nobody passes any text to Button?

If nobody passes any text to Button, then Button‘s display will be blank. It would be better if Button could display a default message instead.

You can make this happen by giving your component class a property named defaultProps:
```JS
class Example extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <h1>{this.props.text}</h1>;
  }
}
 
Example.defaultProps;
```

The defaultProps property should be equal to an object:
```Js
class Example extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <h1>{this.props.text}</h1>;
  }
}
 
// Set defaultProps equal to an object:
Example.defaultProps = {};
```

Inside of this object, write properties for any default props that you’d like to set:
```JS
class Example extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <h1>{this.props.text}</h1>;
  }
}
 
Example.defaultProps = { text: 'yo' };
```

If an `<Example />` doesn’t get passed any text, then it will display “yo.”

If an `<Example />` does get passed some text, then it will display that passed-in text.

# this.state

## Setting Initial State
A React component can access dynamic information in two ways: props and state.

Unlike props, a component’s state is not passed in from the outside. A component decides its own state.

To make a component have state, give the component a state property. This property should be declared inside of a constructor method, like this:
```JS
class Example extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = { mood: 'decent' };
  }
 
  render() {
    return <div></div>;
  }
}
 
<Example />
```

Whoa, a constructor method? super(props)? What’s going on here? Let’s look more closely at this potentially unfamiliar code:
```
constructor(props) {
  super(props);
  this.state = { mood: 'decent' };
}
```

this.state should be equal to an object, like in the example above. This object represents the initial “state” of any component instance. We’ll explain that more soon!

How about the rest of the code? constructor and super are both features of ES6, not unique to React. There is nothing particularly React-y about their usage here. A full explanation of their functionality is outside of the scope of this course, but we’d recommend [familiarizing yourself](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2015/07/es6-in-depth-classes/). It is important to note that React components always have to call super in their constructors to be set up properly.

Look at the bottom of the highest code example in this column. `<Example />` has a state, and its state is equal to { mood: 'decent' }.

## Access a Component's state
To read a component’s state, use the expression this.state.name-of-property:
```JS
class TodayImFeeling extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = { mood: 'decent' };
  }
 
  render() {
    return (
      <h1>
        I'm feeling {this.state.mood}!
      </h1>
    );
  }
}
```

The above component class reads a property in its state from inside of its render function.

Just like this.props, you can use this.state from any property defined inside of a component class’s body.

## Update state with this.setState
A component can do more than just read its own state. A component can also change its own state.

A component changes its state by calling the function this.setState().

this.setState() takes two arguments: an object that will update the component’s state, and a callback. You basically never need the callback.

In the code editor, take a look at Example.js. Notice that `<Example />` has a state of:
```JS
{
  mood:   'great',
  hungry: false
}
```

Now, let’s say that `<Example />` were to call:
```JS
this.setState({ hungry: true });
```

After that call, here is what `<Example />`‘s state would be:
```JS
{
  mood:   'great',
  hungry: true
}
```

The mood part of the state remains unaffected!

this.setState() takes an object, and merges that object with the component’s current state. If there are properties in the current state that aren’t part of that object, then those properties remain how they were.

## Call this.setState from Another Function
The most common way to call this.setState() is to call a custom function that wraps a this.setState() call. .makeSomeFog() is an example:
```JS
class Example extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = { weather: 'sunny' };
    this.makeSomeFog = this.makeSomeFog.bind(this);
  }
 
  makeSomeFog() {
    this.setState({
      weather: 'foggy'
    });
  }
}
```
Notice how the method makeSomeFog() contains a call to this.setState().

You may have noticed a weird line in there:
```JS
this.makeSomeFog = this.makeSomeFog.bind(this);
```

This line is necessary because makeSomeFog()‘s body contains the word this. We’ll talk about it more soon!

Let’s walk through how a function wrapping this.setState() might work in practice. In the code editor, read Mood.js all the way through.

Here is how a `<Mood />`‘s state would be set:
1. A user triggers an event (in this case a click event, triggered by clicking on a `<button></button>`).
2. The event from Step 1 is being listened for (in this case by the onClick attribute on line 20).
3. When this listened-for event occurs, it calls an event handler function (in this case, this.toggleMood(), called on line 20 and defined on lines 11-14).
4. Inside of the body of the event handler, this.setState() is called (in this case on line 13).
5. The component’s state is changed!

Due to the way that event handlers are bound in JavaScript, this.toggleMood() loses its this when it is used on line 20. Therefore, the expressions this.state.mood and this.setState on lines 12 and 13 won’t mean what they’re supposed to… unless you have already bound the correct this to this.toggleMood.

That is why we must bind this.toggleMood to this on line 8.

For an in-depth explanation of this kind of binding trickery, [begin with the React docs](https://reactjs.org/docs/handling-events.html). For the less curious, just know that in React, whenever you define an event handler that uses this, you need to add this.methodName = this.methodName.bind(this) to your constructor function.

Look at the statement on line 12. What does that do?

Line 12 declares a const named newMood equal to the opposite of this.state.mood. If this.state.mood is “good”, then newMood will be “bad,” and vice versa.

A `<Mood />` instance would display “I’m feeling good!” along with a button. Clicking on the button would change the display to “I’m feeling bad!” Clicking again would change back to “I’m feeling good!”, etc. Try to follow the step-by-step walkthrough in Mood.js and see how all of this works.

One final note: you can’t call this.setState() from inside of the render function! We’ll explain why in the next exercise.

## this.setState Automatically Calls render
There’s something odd about all of this.

Look again at Toggle.js.

When a user clicks on the `<button></button>`, the .changeColor() method is called. Take a look at .changeColor()‘s definition.

.changeColor() calls this.setState(), which updates this.state.color. However, even if this.state.color is updated from green to yellow, that alone shouldn’t be enough to make the screen’s color change!

The screen’s color doesn’t change until Toggle renders.

Inside of the render function, it’s this line:
```JS
<div style={{background:this.state.color}}>
```

that changes a virtual DOM object’s color to the new this.state.color, eventually causing a change in the screen.

If you call .changeColor(), shouldn’t you then also have to call .render() again? .changeColor() only makes it so that, the next time that you render, the color will be different. Why can you see the new background right away, if you haven’t re-rendered the component?

Here’s why: Any time that you call this.setState(), this.setState() AUTOMATICALLY calls .render() as soon as the state has changed.

Think of this.setState() as actually being two things: this.setState(), immediately followed by .render().

That is why you can’t call this.setState() from inside of the .render() method! this.setState() automatically calls .render(). If .render() calls this.setState(), then an infinite loop is created.

## Components Interacting Recap
In this unit, you learned how to use import and export to access one file from another. You learned about props and state, and the countless variations on how they work.

Before this unit, you learned about JSX, components, and how they can work together.

A React app is basically just a lot of components, setting state and passing props to one another. Now that you have a real understanding of how to use props and state, you have by far the most important tools that you need!

In future lessons, the focus will shift slightly outward. In addition to learning more new skills, you’ll also learn your first programming patterns. These large-scale strategies will help you combine what you’ve learned and really start building.
