# Index
* [Stateless Components from Stateful Components](#stateless-components-from-stateful-components)
* [Child Components Update Their Parents' State](#child-components-update-their-parents-state)
* [Child Components Update Their Siblings' Props](#child-components-update-their-siblings-props)

# Stateless Components from Stateful Components

## Stateless Components Inherit From Stateful Components
Let’s learn our first programming pattern!

In this lesson, we’ll take a look at a simple version of a programming pattern. The following lessons will expand upon that lesson, and by the end, we’ll have a programming pattern in its full complexity.

Our programming pattern uses two React components: a stateful component, and a stateless component. “Stateful” describes any component that has a state property; “stateless” describes any component that does not.

In our pattern, a stateful component passes its state down to a stateless component.

## Build a Stateful Component Class
Let’s make a stateful component pass its state to a stateless component.

To make that happen, you need two component classes: a stateful class, and a stateless class.
`Parent.js`
```JS
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
import { Child } from './Child';

class Parent extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = { name: 'Frarthur' };
  }
  render () {
    return (
      <Child name={this.state.name} />
    );
  }
};
ReactDOM.render(<Parent />, document.getElementById('app'));
```
`Child.js`
```JS
import React from 'react';

export class Child extends React.Component {
  render () {
    return (
      <h1>Hey, my name is {this.props.name}</h1>
    );
  }
};
```

## Pass a Component's State
A <Parent /> is supposed to pass its state to a <Child />.

Before a <Parent /> can pass anything to a <Child />, you need to import Child into Parent.js.
```JS
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
import { Child } from './Child';

class Parent extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);
    this.state = { name: 'Frarthur' };
  }
  render () {
    return (
      <Child name={this.state.name} />
    );
  }
};
ReactDOM.render(<Parent />, document.getElementById('app'));
```

## Don't Update props
Great work! You just passed information from a stateful component to a stateless component. You will be doing a lot of that.

You learned earlier that a component can change its state by calling this.setState(). You may have been wondering: how does a component change its props?

The answer: it doesn’t!

A component should never update this.props. Look at Bad.js to see an example of what not to do.

This is potentially confusing. props and state store dynamic information. Dynamic information can change, by definition. If a component can’t change its props, then what are props for?

A React component should use props to store information that can be changed, but can only be changed by a different component.

A React component should use state to store information that the component itself can change.

If that’s a bit confusing, don’t worry! The next two lessons will be examples.
```JS
import React from 'react';

class Bad extends React.Component {
  render() {
    this.props.message = 'yo'; // NOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!!!
    return <h1>{this.props.message}</h1>;
  }
}
```

# Child Components Update Their Parents' State

## Child Components Update Their Parents' state
How does a stateless, child component update the state of the parent component? Here’s how that works:

1

The parent component class defines a method that calls this.setState().

For an example, look in Step1.js at the .handleClick() method.

2

The parent component binds the newly-defined method to the current instance of the component in its constructor. This ensures that when we pass the method to the child component, it will still update the parent component.

For an example, look in Step2.js at the end of the constructor() method.

3

Once the parent has defined a method that updates its state and bound to it, the parent then passes that method down to a child.

Look in Step2.js, at the prop on line 28.

4

The child receives the passed-down function, and uses it as an event handler.

Look in Step3.js. When a user clicks on the `<button></button>`, a click event will fire. This will make the passed-down function get called, which will update the parent’s state.

## Automatic Binding
Great work! Stateless components updating their parents’ state is a React pattern that you’ll see more and more. Learning to recognize it will help you understand how React apps are organized.

Click Next to move on to the final version of our programming pattern!

# Child Components Update Their Siblings' Props

## Child Components Update Sibling Components
Patterns within patterns within patterns!

In lesson 1, you learned your first React programming pattern: a stateful, parent component passes down a prop to a stateless, child component.

In lesson 2, you learned that lesson 1’s pattern is actually part of a larger pattern: a stateful, parent component passes down an event handler to a stateless, child component. The child component then uses that event handler to update its parent’s state.

In this lesson, we will expand the pattern one last time. A child component updates its parent’s state, and the parent passes that state to a sibling component.

An understanding of this final pattern will be very helpful in the wild, not to mention in the next React course. Click Next and we’ll build an example!

## One Sibling to Display, Another to Change
One of the very first things that you learned about components is that they should only have one job.

In the last lesson, Child had two jobs:

1 - Child displayed a name.

2 - Child offered a way to change that name.

You should divide Child in two: one component for displaying the name, and a different component for allowing a user to change the name.

In the code editor, select Child.js. Notice that these lines have vanished:
```JS
<h1>
  Hey, my name is {this.props.name}! 
</h1>
```

The new version of Child renders a dropdown menu for changing the name, and that’s it.

Select Sibling.js in the code editor.

Read through the render function’s return statement.

Here, the name is displayed! Or at least it will be displayed, once you’ve done a little editing.

That brings us to the essential new concept for this lesson: you will have one stateless component display information, and a different stateless component offer the ability to change that information.

## Pass the Right props to the Right Siblings
Look at Parent.js in the code editor.

Three things have changed in this file since the last Lesson:
1. Sibling has been required on line 4.
2. A `<Sibling />` instance has been added to the render function on line 27.
3. `<Sibling />` and `<Child />` have been wrapped in a `<div></div>`, since JSX expressions must have only one outer element.
```JS
import React from 'react';
import ReactDOM from 'react-dom';
import { Child } from './Child';
import { Sibling } from './Sibling';

class Parent extends React.Component {
  constructor(props) {
    super(props);

    this.state = { name: 'Frarthur' };

    this.changeName = this.changeName.bind(this);
  }

  changeName(newName) {
    this.setState({
      name: newName
    });
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <Child
          onChange={this.changeName} />
        <Sibling name={this.state.name} />
      </div>
    );
  }
}

ReactDOM.render(
  <Parent />,
  document.getElementById('app')
);
```

## Display Information in a Sibling Component
You’re on the last step!

You’ve passed the name down to `<Sibling />` as a prop. Now `<Sibling />` has to display that prop.
```JS
import React from 'react';

export class Sibling extends React.Component {
  render() {
    const name = this.props.name;
    return (
      <div>
        <h1>Hey, my name is {name}!</h1>
        <h2>Don't you think {name} is the prettiest name ever?</h2>
        <h2>Sure am glad that my parents picked {name}!</h2>
      </div>
    );
  }
}
```

## Stateless Components Inherit From Stateful Components Recap
You just executed your first complete React programming pattern!

Let’s review. Follow each step in the code editor:
* A stateful component class defines a function that calls this.setState. (Parent.js, lines 15-19)
* The stateful component passes that function down to a stateless component. (Parent.js, line 24)
* That stateless component class defines a function that calls the passed-down function, and that can take an event object as an argument. (Child.js, lines 10-13)
* The stateless component class uses this new function as an event handler. (Child.js, line 20)
* When an event is detected, the parent’s state updates. (A user selects a new dropdown menu item)
* The stateful component class passes down its state, distinct from the ability to change its state, to a different stateless component. (Parent.js, line 25)
* That stateless component class receives the state and displays it. (Sibling.js, lines 5-10)
* An instance of the stateful component class is rendered. One stateless child component displays the state, and a different stateless child component displays a way to change the state. (Parent.js, lines 23-26)

This pattern occurs in React all the time! The more that you see it, the more that its elegance will become clear.

Being introduced to this pattern is your first step towards understanding how React apps fit together! You’ll get more practice using it throughout this course, as well as in the course after this one.
