# Index
* [Style](#style)
* [Container Components From Presentational Components](#container-components-from-presentational-components)
* [PropTypes](#proptypes)
* [React Forms](#react-forms)

# Style

## Inline Styles
There are many different ways to use styles in React. This lesson is focused on one of them: inline styles.

An inline style is a style that’s written as an attribute, like this:
```JS
<h1 style={{ color: 'red' }}>Hello world</h1>
```

Notice the double curly braces. What are those for?

The outer curly braces inject JavaScript into JSX. They say, “everything between us should be read as JavaScript, not JSX.”

The inner curly braces create a JavaScript object literal. They make this a valid JavaScript object:
```JS
{ color: 'red' }
```

If you inject an object literal into JSX, and your entire injection is only that object literal, then you will end up with double curly braces. There’s nothing unusual about how they work, but they look funny and can be confusing.

## Make A Style Object Variable
That’s all that you need to apply basic styles in React! Simple and straightforward.

One problem with this approach is that it becomes obnoxious if you want to use more than just a few styles. An alternative that’s often nicer is to store a style object in a variable, and then inject that variable into JSX.

Look in the code editor for an example. The style object is defined on lines 3-6, and then injected on line 11.

If you aren’t used to using modules, then this code may have made you twitch uncontrollably:
```JS
const style = {
  color: 'darkcyan',
  background: 'mintcream'
};
```

Defining a variable named style in the top-level scope would be an extremely bad idea in many JavaScript environments! In React, however, it’s totally fine.

Remember that every file is invisible to every other file, except for what you choose to expose via module.exports. You could have 100 different files, all with global variables named style, and there could be no conflicts.

## Style Name Syntax
In regular JavaScript, style names are written in hyphenated-lowercase:
```JS
const styles = {
  'margin-top': '20px',
  'background-color': 'green'
};
```

In React, those same names are instead written in camelCase:
```Js
const styles = {
  marginTop: '20px',
  backgroundColor: 'green'
};
```

This has zero effect on style property values, only on style property names.

## Style Value Syntax
In the last exercise, you learned how style names are slightly different in React than they are in regular JavaScript.

In this exercise, you will learn how style values are slightly different in React than they are in regular JavaScript.

In regular JS, style values are almost always strings. Even if a style value is numeric, you usually have to write it as a string so that you can specify a unit. For example, you have to write "450px" or "20%".

In React, if you write a style value as a number, then the unit "px" is assumed.

How convenient! If you want a font size of 30px, you can write:
```JS
{ fontSize: 30 }
```
If you want to use units other than “px,” you can use a string:
```JS
{ fontSize: "2em" }
```

Specifying “px” with a string will still work, although it’s redundant.

A few specific styles will not automatically fill in the “px” for you. These are styles where you aren’t likely to use “px” anyway, so you don’t really have to worry about it. [Here is a list of styles that don’t assume “px”](https://github.com/facebook/react/blob/4131af3e4bf52f3a003537ec95a1655147c81270/src/renderers/dom/shared/CSSProperty.js#L15-L59).

# Container Components From Presentational Components

## Separate Container Components From Presentational Components
In this lesson, you will learn a programming pattern that will help organize your React code.

As you continue building your React application, you will soon realize that one component has too many responsibilities, but how do you know when you have reached that point?

Separating container components from presentational components helps to answer that question. It shows you when it might be a good time to divide a component into smaller components. It also shows you how to perform that division.

## Create Container Component
Separating container components from presentational components is a popular React programming pattern. It is a special application of the concepts learned in the Stateless Components From Stateful Components module.

If a component has to have state, make calculations based on props, or manage any other complex logic, then that component shouldn’t also have to render HTML-like JSX.

The functional part of a component (state, calculations, etc.) can be separated into a container component.

## Separate Presentational Component
Now that we’ve created a container component for the logic, we can dedicate the original component, GuineaPigs, to be a presentational component.

The presentational component’s only job is to contain HTML-like JSX. It should be an exported component and will not render itself because a presentational component will always get rendered by a container component.

As a separate example, say we have Presentational and Container components. Presentational.js must export the component class (or function, when applicable):
```JS
export class Presentational extends Component {
```

Container.js must import that component:
```JS
import { Presentational } from 'Presentational.js';
```

## Render Presentational Component in Container Component
We now have a container component (containers/GuineaPigsContainer.js) for logic and a presentational component (components/GuineaPigs.js) for rendering JSX!

The container component should now render the presentational component instead of rendering JSX.

## Remove Logic from Presentational Component
Our container component now renders the GuineaPigs presentational component instead of JSX statements!

The last step to separating the container component from the presentational component is to remove redundant logic in the presentational component. The presentational component should be left with the render function that contains JSX statements.

## Review
Congrats! You divided the GuineaPigs component into a container component and a presentational component: containers/GuineaPigsContainer.js and components/GuineaPigs.js.

Here are the steps we took:
1. Identified that the original component needed to be refactored: it was handling both calculations/logic and presentation/rendering
2. Copied the original component to a new containers/ folder and renamed it GuineaPigsContainer
3. Removed all of the presentation/rendering code from the container component
4. Removed all of the calculation/logic code from the presentational component
5. Accessed the presentational component from within the container using import and export
6. Edited the container’s render() method to render the presentational component with the proper props

In this programming pattern, the container component does the work of figuring out what to display. The presentational component does the work of actually displaying it. If a component does a significant amount of work in both areas, then that’s a sign that you should use this pattern!

If you’d like to learn more about this pattern, here are some articles to start with:

* [Container Components](https://medium.com/@learnreact/container-components-c0e67432e005)
* [Presentational and Container Components](https://medium.com/@dan_abramov/smart-and-dumb-components-7ca2f9a7c7d0)

# PropTypes

## propTypes
In this lesson, you will learn to use an important React feature called propTypes.

propTypes are useful for two reasons. The first reason is prop validation.

Validation can ensure that your props are doing what they’re supposed to be doing. If props are missing, or if they’re present but they aren’t what you’re expecting, then a warning will print in the console.

This is useful, but reason #2 is arguably more useful: documentation.

Documenting props makes it easier to glance at a file and quickly understand the component class inside. When you have a lot of files, and you will, this can be a huge benefit.

Click Next to learn how to use propTypes!

## Apply PropTypes
In the code editor, take a look at MessageDisplayer‘s render function.

Notice the expression this.props.message. From this expression, you can deduce that MessageDisplayer expects to get passed a prop named message. Somewhere, at some time, this code is expected to execute:

```JS
<MessageDisplayer message="something" />
```

If a component class expects a prop, then you can use propTypes for that component class!

In order to start using propTypes, we need to import the 'prop-types' library.
```JS
import PropTypes from 'prop-types';
```

Then, you can declare propTypes as a static property for your component after the component has been defined. See the example of a propTypes property on lines 11-13. Notice that the value of propTypes is an object, not a function!

The second step is to add properties to the propTypes object. For each prop that your component class expects to receive, there can be one property on your propTypes object.

MessageDisplayer only expects one prop: message. Therefore, its propTypes object only has one property.

## Add Properties to PropTypes
In the code editor, look at the property on MessageDisplayer‘s propTypes object:
```JS
message: PropTypes.string 
```

What are the properties on propTypes supposed to be, exactly?

The name of each property in propTypes should be the name of an expected prop. In our case, MessageDisplayer expects a prop named message, so our property’s name is message.

The value of each property in propTypes should fit this pattern:
```JS
PropTypes.expected_data_type_goes_here
```

Since message is presumably going to be a string, we chose PropTypes.string. You can see this on line 13. Notice the difference in capitalization between the propTypes object and PropTypes!

Each property on the propTypes object is called a propType.

Select the next file in the code editor, Runner.js. Find Runner‘s propTypes object.

Runner has six propTypes! Look at each one. Note that bool and func are abbreviated, but all other data types are spelled normally.

If you add .isRequired to a propType, then you will get a console warning if that prop isn’t sent.

Try to find all six props from the propTypes object in Runner‘s render function: this.props.message, this.props.style, etc.

## PropTypes in Function Components
Remember function components? You can see some familiar ones in Example.js.

How could you write propTypes for a function component?
```JS
// Usual way:
class Example extends React.component{
 
}
 
Example.propTypes = {
 
};
...
 
// Function component way:
const Example = (props) => {
  // ummm ??????
}
```

It turns out the process is fairly similar. To write propTypes for a function component, you define a propTypes object as a property of the function component itself. Here’s what that looks like:
```JS
const Example = (props) => {
  return <h1>{props.message}</h1>;
}
 
Example.propTypes = {
  message: PropTypes.string.isRequired
};
```

# React Forms

## React Forms
This unit’s final lesson is about forms.

Think about how forms work in a typical, non-React environment. A user types some data into a form’s input fields, and the server doesn’t know about it. The server remains clueless until the user hits a “submit” button, which sends all of the form’s data over to the server simultaneously.

In React, as in many other JavaScript environments, this is not the best way of doing things.

The problem is the period of time during which a form thinks that a user has typed one thing, but the server thinks that the user has typed a different thing. What if, during that time, a third part of the website needs to know what a user has typed? It could ask the form or the server and get two different answers. In a complex JavaScript app with many moving, interdependent parts, this kind of conflict can easily lead to problems.

In a React form, you want the server to know about every new character or deletion, as soon as it happens. That way, your screen will always be in sync with the rest of your application.

## Input onChange
A traditional form doesn’t update the server until a user hits “submit.” But you want to update the server any time a user enters or deletes any character.

## Write an Input Event Handler
In this exercise, you will define a function that gets called whenever a user enters or deletes any character.

This function will be an event handler. It will listen for change events. You can see an example of an event handler listening for change events in Example.js.

## Set the Input's Initial State
Good! Any time that someone types or deletes in `<input />`, the .handleUserInput() method will update this.state.userInput with the `<input />`‘s text.

Since you’re using this.setState, that means that Input needs an initial state! What should this.state‘s initial value be?

Well, this.state.userInput will be displayed in the `<input />`. What should the initial text in the `<input />` be, when a user first visits the page?

The initial text should be blank! Otherwise it would look like someone had already typed something.

## Update an Input's Value
When a user types or deletes in the `<input />`, then that will trigger a change event, which will call handleUserInput. That’s good!

handleUserInput will set this.state.userInput equal to whatever text is currently in the input field. That’s also good!

There’s only one problem: you can set this.state.userInput to whatever you want, but `<input />` won’t care. You need to somehow make the `<input />`‘s text responsive to this.state.userInput.

Easy enough! You can control an `<input />`‘s text by setting its value attribute.

## Controlled vs Uncontrolled
There are two terms that will probably come up when you talk about React forms: controlled component and uncontrolled component. Like automatic binding, controlled vs uncontrolled components is a topic that you should be familiar with, but don’t need to understand deeply at this point.

An uncontrolled component is a component that maintains its own internal state. A controlled component is a component that does not maintain any internal state. Since a controlled component has no state, it must be controlled by someone else.

Think of a typical `<input type='text' />` element. It appears onscreen as a text box. If you need to know what text is currently in the box, then you can ask the `<input />`, possibly with some code like this:
```JS
let input = document.querySelector('input[type="text"]');
 
let typedText = input.value; // input.value will be equal to whatever text is currently in the text box.
```

The important thing here is that the `<input />` keeps track of its own text. You can ask it what its text is at any time, and it will be able to tell you.

The fact that `<input />` keeps track of information makes it an uncontrolled component. It maintains its own internal state, by remembering data about itself.

A controlled component, on the other hand, has no memory. If you ask it for information about itself, then it will have to get that information through props. Most React components are controlled.

In React, when you give an `<input />` a value attribute, then something strange happens: the `<input />` BECOMES controlled. It stops using its internal storage. This is a more ‘React’ way of doing things.

You can find more information about controlled and uncontrolled components in the React Forms documentation.

## React Forms Recap
Great work! You just wrote your first React form.

Notice that you didn’t use a submit button. You didn’t even use a `<form>` element! Your “form” was actually just an `<input />`.

That won’t always be the case. You will still sometimes want a `<form>` element and a submit button, especially if you need to differentiate between a finished form and an in-progress form. But in some cases, it’s fine to have a “form” that is really just an input field.

This is because, unlike in the traditional form paradigm, in React you re-send your form on every single character change. That removes the need to ever “submit” anything.

That marks the end of this unit! You’ve learned a wide variety of important techniques: inline styles, separating container and presentational components, stateless functional components, proptypes, and forms. You’ll review all of it in the next course! There is only one major tool still missing from your toolbelt: lifecycle methods. We’ll cover those in this course’s final unit.
