# Introduction to the API Development
# Introduction to the API Development Lifecycle

## What is the API development lifecycle?
Application Programming Interfaces, or APIs, have become a vital tool for both engineers and businesses as a whole. APIs enable two different services to interact and complement each other, opening the doors to many engineering and business possibilities.

However, developing an API by itself is no easy task. Creating an API encompasses a series of steps, each with its own complex processes. This collection of steps is known as the API development lifecycle. To understand how to develop successful APIs, we must first understand each stage of the lifecycle.

While there are many frameworks and methodologies for the API lifecycle, there are typically five chronological stages:
1. Planning and Designing the API
2. Developing the API
3. Testing the API
4. Deploying and Managing the API
5. Retiring the API

Each of these stages is a vital piece to making sure an API is successful. Let’s dive in and explore the details of each stage.

## Planning and Designing the API
API planning and design is the first stage of the API development lifecycle. This stage involves ideating and mapping out the various resources and operations and their associated use cases before the API is fully implemented in code.

Typically business team members (or sometimes even engineers) will begin by mapping out the capabilities of the API and the data it should expose. This process usually captures the API audience’s needs and the requirements from various stakeholders.

When the API requirements are done being mapped out, engineering teams can then begin laying out the architecture of the API. Naming conventions, protocols, technology, and much more are debated and finalized.

## Developing the API
Once the requirements are mapped out and the engineering team has a plan, the development stage begins. This stage focuses on implementing the API based on the plan and design and is when engineering teams will do the necessary work to bring the API to life.

Typically this is also where the API is documented. Often when APIs are treated as a product (that the team or business makes revenue from), teams will spend just as much time documenting their API as they will on any of the other phases. A good example is the [IMDB Movie API](https://imdb-api.com/) that offers free and paid services. Note the extent of the APIs documentation found [here](https://imdb-api.com/).

## Testing the API
In the testing phase, the API would be thoroughly tested and monitored for performance issues. This phase typically catches any issues so that engineering teams can refine the API before it is released to the end-users (sometimes referred to as end-consumers) — the person or persons who will use the product (e.g., the API).

## Deploying and Managing the API
Ultimately, APIs must satisfy a use case for an end consumer, be it an internal developer team, a partner company, or the general public. After the testing phase, APIs are ready for release and are deployed to a secure environment to facilitate easy discovery and consumption.

On some occasions, mainly when APIs are public-facing, APIs are released into beta where end-users (sometimes only a small percentage) can test and experiment with the API and give feedback and report bugs. The beta helps finalize any outstanding issues as well as gain valuable feedback before a full API release.

This phase is also where APIs are managed for the rest of their lifetime to deliver guaranteed and high-quality API performance. Management includes but is not limited to performance tracking, usage analysis, community building, and a lot more!

## Retiring the API
Lastly, the final phase of the API lifecycle is deprecation. This phase is where support for an API’s version, or in many cases, an entire API itself, is discontinued.

Deprecation involves creating a detailed plan on migrating users away from the API and releasing the APIs resources. Deprecation needs to be handled with extreme care as it may impact many end-users and associated products that utilize the API.

## Wrap up
To summarize, we learned:
* What the API development lifecycle is
* What happens during the API design and planning phase
* What happens during the API development and management phase
* What happens during the API testing phase
* What happens during the API deployment phase
* What happens during the API retirement phase

Learning to master the intricate processes in each stage of the API development lifecycle will bring us and the teams we work on closer to implementing successful API solutions.
