# Index
* [Server Testing Stack](#server-testing-stack)
* [Server Testing Patterns](#server-testing-patterns)

# Server Testing Stack

## Introduction
When testing an application, feature tests expose required tests or implementations at different levels of the application technology stack. One of those levels is the backend server.

Server tests are used to test the server response only, not any front-end rendering of code or user interactions. We “disconnect” the browser and interact directly with the server using requests. The tests define the expected behavior of the interactions and check the actual responses against what we expect.

Server tests are commonly used to test API responses, but we also use server tests for any server response that our application relies on. This can include checking status codes and error messages.

In this lesson, we introduce a suite of technologies and concepts for performing testing on a JavaScript-based server. These include Chai, jsdom, and SuperTest. We also review how to use async/await for asynchronous calls. When adapting this to your project, it needs to be tailored to match the specific technology stack for your project.

## Testing Framework: Chai
When writing tests, sometimes you’ll find that the tests require calculation steps or inline code to determine if the test is passing. For example, to test if an array foo includes an element bar using Mocha with the built-in Node assertion library, we use the JavaScript includes helper:
```JS
assert.ok(foo.includes(bar));
```

To improve the readability and flow of our tests, we extend the built-in Node assertion library with Chai.
```JS
const {assert} = require('chai');
```

The main function in Chai we are using is .include(). This allows us to rewrite the previous example as:
```JS
assert.include(foo, bar);
```

Include also works to check that text contains certain values:
```JS
assert.include('foobar', 'bar'); // Evaluates to true
```

The large set of assertion methods in the chai library enable us to write more expressive tests that are easy for developers to understand.

## Testing HTML Responses
Our back-end server is serving dynamic HTML to the user. For the homepage, this is located in the jsdom-test.js file to the right. It is possible to use .include() to verify that the HTML response contains certain Strings, but gets cumbersome to verify the hierarchical relationships of DOM elements.

We can use the jsdom library to improve this type of assertion. It allows us to select elements of the DOM and check relationships and content. To increase the readability of our tests, we abstracted the jsdom functionality into a custom function, parseTextFromHTML:
```JS
const parseTextFromHTML = (htmlAsString, selector) => {
  const selectedElement = jsdom(htmlAsString).querySelector(selector);
  if (selectedElement !== null) {
    return selectedElement.textContent;
  } else {
    throw new Error(`No element with selector ${selector} found in HTML string`);
  }
};
```
This function takes the HTML response as a string and the desired selector as inputs and returns the textContent of the corresponding element. If no element is found, it will return a TypeError.

## Async / Await
A server typically handles many requests at a time, but may be only capable of processing a subset of the requests concurrently. One side effect of this is that the server response time is neither instant nor predictable. If no other processes are occurring on the server, requests are handled quickly, but if the server is close to full capacity, the request can take a few seconds or even timeout.

We need a way to receive asynchronous responses from the server and then act on them. The async/await pattern introduced in Node 8 helps us write readable descriptions of the behavior of our application which is an important part of writing good tests.

To use this pattern, define the function with the async keyword. Then, within the function, use the await keyword in front of the asynchronous function you are calling. For example:
```JS
const foo = async () => {
  console.log(await someAsyncThing());
  return true;
}
 
foo();
```

Here, we are waiting for someAsyncThing() to return before logging the result to the console.

## SuperTest
As you may have noticed in the previous exercise, we are using the function request to make server calls to support our tests. This is actually a reference to the SuperTest library:
```JS
const request = require('supertest');
```

This library was specifically designed for testing Node server responses and integrates well with Mocha and Chai. To use SuperTest, we pass the app object from our app into the request function. To make a GET request, we use .get() with the desired route as the argument:
```JS
await request(app)
          .get('/')
          .send();
```

It is also possible to perform a POST using SuperTest. We chain any desired properties or inputs to the HTTP call, and use .send() to make the request:
```JS
await request(app)
          .post('/messages')
          .type('form')
          .send({author, message});
```

## Summary
In this lesson we covered a set of technologies used for testing a Node server. These included:
* Chai - a library for extending the built in Node assertion library
* jsdom - a library for interacting and testing the DOM returned by the server (this functionality is encapsulated in our parseTextFromHTML helper function).
* async / await - a pattern for making asynchronous code more readable
* SuperTest - a library for making Node server requests and testing their responses

# Server Testing Patterns

## Introduction
In general, it is up to the developer to make a judgement call on how in depth to write a test. Every test written adds time to the testing cycle and can require maintenance if changes are made to the server behavior. For example, extensively testing failure cases at the feature level might be more than is needed if the error behavior can be fully tested and described at the server level.

As you develop an application, you may realize that you can replace feature tests or reduce them with equal coverage at a lower level. One question to ask when deciding between a full feature test versus a server test is:

“Is it worth trading a slow feature test for a faster server test that doesn’t test the UI?”

Based on the context of the different levels of testing, you should aim to pick the set of tests that gives you the best combination of reliable, complete and fast tests.

In this lesson, you will use server-level testing technologies to test-drive the development of an Express server.

Server tests often provide feedback in terms of HTTP domain concepts, like status codes, header keys and values, and the content of the response body. Let’s take a look at a feature-level test and compare it to a corresponding server test in messages-test.js to the right:
```JS
describe('posting a message', () => {
  it('saves the message with the author information', () => {
    const author = 'user name';
    const message ='feature testing with TDD makes me feel empowered to create a better workflow';

    browser.url('/');
    browser.setValue('input[id=author]', author);
    browser.setValue('textarea[id=message]', message);
    browser.click('input[type=submit]');

    assert.include(messagesText(), message);
    assert.include(messagesText(), author);
  });
});
```

When such a test fails due to a non-existent server implementation, the developer needs to dive into the server level and begin the TDD process to drive the server solution.

## Status Codes
Server tests are slightly faster than browser-driven feature tests. Since the web browser is cut out of the test, we are not testing how things are rendered for the user. Instead, we are focused on the server response.

One use of TDD at the server level is to ensure that the HTTP status codes are returned as expected. Verifying status codes provide the most basic level of confidence that the server is functioning correctly. Having a test suite that includes status codes provides a quick check when implementing a new feature that we haven’t accidentally caused a request for valid routes to respond not authorized (401) or not found (404). (Full list of status codes at [httpstatuses.com](httpstatuses))

To verify status codes, we are asserting that the response status is equal to the status code integer that our application requires:

assert.equal(response.status, 200);
If we use the “red, green, refactor” approach to implement our server behavior we would start out with an assertion like this and expect it to fail (“red”). We then implement the behavior to pass the test (“green”) and continue to refactor if needed, ensuring the test remains passing.

## Response Content
In the previous exercise, we checked that the server responded with specific status codes. Now we need to make sure the server is responding with the correct content. Specifically, we are looking at HTML responses that are rendered by the front-end.

Many servers return dynamic HTML content based on the user, the URL accessed, header values, and more. We use TDD to ensure the server responds correctly for each case. When designing our tests, it is important to consider both the intended and unintended user behavior.

We can organize our tests into two categories:
* tests that exercise the “Happy Path” — expected use cases of our application
* tests that exercise the “Sad Path” — unexpected or invalid use of our application

For our tests, once we retrieve the response from the server, we use assert.include() from the Chai library to check the response.

As an example, after requesting a valid profile page for “My Name”, you may receive the following response content:
```JS
response.text = '<div><div id="my-name">My Name</div></div>';
```

You can retrieve the content of #my-name and check it using the following:
```JS
assert.include(parseTextFromHTML(response.text, '#my-name'), "My Name"); //True
```

We could also write a separate test to check the corresponding “sad path”. Perhaps there is not yet a page for “Your Name”, so you should not receive a response containing similar HTML. We use .notInclude() to verify that the response is not including “Your Name” :
```JS
assert.notInclude(parseTextFromHTML(response.text, '#my-name'), "Your Name"); //True
```

Note that here we are identifying the HTML elements by their ID using our parseTextFromHTML() helper but you can use any selectors supported by the jsdom library. This helper is returning the text content of the corresponding HTML element only, but you could write a separate helper for accessing other attributes.

## Refactoring: Route Parameters
In the previous exercise, we checked that the server responded with a specific message. On our home page, the title is constant for everyone, “Messaging App”.

What if we want to create a profile page that is customized for each user?

A straightforward implementation would be to generate hard coded routes for every single user of our app. Think: 'welcome/alice' => '<h1>Your Name is alice</h1>', 'welcome/bob' => '<h1>Your Name is bob</h1>', etc.

Hopefully if you see repetitive code like this, you’ll have an urge to refactor it to something more elegant using a variable route parameter. This allows us to put any username into the url and have the server generate the appropriate response. Think: 'welcome/:username' => '<h1>Your Name is ' + req.params.username +'</h1>'.

If you are using the red, green, refactor approach, you will start with a set of passing (“green”) assertions for the section of code you are looking to improve. With the current behavior captured, you can begin refactoring, knowing that your tests will “catch” you by turning red if you miss something in your approach.

## Refactoring: Handlebars
Sometimes during the reflection of the refactor phase, you will realize that you can implement something better or more efficiently. In the code so far, we have been responding with inline HTML strings. On a large project, this could make it difficult for the front end developer to organize and maintain.

An improved approach to this is using a templating library like Handlebars to separate the HTML view from the JavaScript controller.

In the web app that you’ve built in this lesson, we’ve placed the templates in the /views folder and have an extension of .handlebars. Our controller will now use render to create the view and pass in any variables:
```JS
const param = 'Foo';
res.render('templateName', {param});
```

The templates are written like regular HTML, but variables can be accessed within the view using double curly braces:
```HTML
<h1>{{ param }}</h1>
```

When the view is rendered, it will replace {{ param }} with its actual value:
```HTML
<h1>Foo</h1>
```

## API Errors
As mentioned earlier, one of the use cases for server testing is for checking API responses, especially the “sad path” where a user interacts with the server in an unexpected or disallowed manner. We need to make sure our server properly handles invalid passwords, form field errors, etc.

Ensuring the app is designed to withstand these issues and that the error interactions are well bounded is important.

Keep in mind that while there may only be one “happy path” for an interaction (user submits a valid password), there can be many corresponding “sad paths” (password is too short, doesn’t contain special characters, etc). By testing the majority of these on the server level, it saves us from testing them at a more resource intensive level including the user view.

## Summary
We used several technologies to write tests for both “happy” and “sad” paths of:
* Server status codes
* Server response content
* Error cases

We also saw how TDD can be used at the server level to guide the implementation of the server code:
* We wrote a failing test
* We wrote the minimal required server code to pass the test
* When we decided or needed to refactor to meet external requirements, we used the existing tests to make sure our refactored code maintained the same end behavior
