# Authentication and Authorization in Postgres

# Authentication and Authorization in Postgres

## Host-Based Authentication
Your first stop is pg_hba.conf, a file that configures host-based authentication in Postgres. The pg_hba.conf file allows you to specify rules for how Postgres should handle different connections. Rules can apply narrowly or broadly, depending on how precise the parameters are.

In the pg_hba.conf file, all the entries follow the same basic format, with blank lines or lines beginning with a # symbol being ignored. The basic format of entries is:
```
connection_type  db  user  address  auth_method  [auth_options]
```

Let’s build and entry together. The entry we’ll be building will allow SSL connections to a database called db_example for members of the g_example group on the same network as the server and use sha-256 password authentication.
* connection_type will be hostssl, which matches external connections that use SSL. host is like hostssl, but matches connections that don’t use SSL as well.
* db will be db_example. The keyword all can be used to match all databases.
* user will be +g_example. The + matches users who are members of this group, rather than the group itself. If we were creating a rule for a specific user, we would omit the +. The keyword all can be used to match all users.
* address will be samenet, a shorthand for connections on the same subnet as the server. Specific IP addresses can be put here as well. The keyword all can be used to match any address.
* auth_method will be scram-sha-256. There are other options, including reject, which unconditionally rejects connections matching the rule.
* We’ll leave auth-options blank.

All together, it looks like:
```
hostssl  db_example  +g_example  samenet  scram-sha-256
```

### Exercises
1. The owner wants you to implement a rule to allow members of the g_employees group on the local network to access the db_customers database. You must also use sha-256 password authentication. The owner doesn’t care whether SSL is used here, so the connection type will be host.
2. HR needs to be able to access the db_employees database, so make a rule to allow members of the g_hr group to access the employee database from the local network using sha-256 password authentication.

    Add your rule to pg_hba.conf below the first rule.
3. The owner, who has the username u_owner, wants to be able to access all the databases from their home computer. Implement a rule to allow connections from their IP address: 104.20.25.250 using sha-256 password authentication. Since this connection goes over the public internet, the connection needs to use SSL.

    Add the appropriate role to pg_hba.conf.
4. Finally, let’s implement a default-deny rule at the very bottom of pg_hba.conf, to ensure that all external connections we don’t specifically allow are blocked. This rule should match all types of external connections, for all databases, users, and addresses, and reject them.

    Add the rule to the bottom of pg_hba.conf. This is important, because we want it to be checked after all the other rules.

`pg_hba.conf`
```
# 1.
host db_customers +g_employees samenet scram-sha-256

# 2.
host db_employees +g_hr samenet scram-sha-256

# 3.
hostssl all u_owner 104.20.25.250 scram-sha-256

# 4.
host all all all reject
```

## User and Role Management
Your next task is to redesign the databases’ role system. As it’s grown over the years, Carcademy’s employees haven’t maintained it properly, resulting in a complex web of permissions and overrides that is difficult to navigate. This complex web makes it easy to introduce vulnerabilities by mistake.

To solve this, you decide to create a system that uses three types of roles: permissions, groups, and users.
* Permissions will determine privileges based on tasks, such as reading and writing to a given table.
* Groups will be collections of permissions, and represent a group of users.
* Users represent specific people or applications, and join groups based on what their job is.

We’ll be using two main commands today: CREATE ROLE and GRANT.
* CREATE ROLE follows the format:
    ```SQL
    CREATE ROLE role_name;
    ```
    
    It has a variety of optional parameters such as SUPERUSER/NOSUPERUSER, but Postgres provides sensible default values for these parameters, so we won’t need to specify them here. (You should always do extra research when creating your own application.)
* GRANT follows two formats:
    ```SQL
    GRANT PERMISSION ON table TO role;
    ```

    is used for granting permissions; if we wanted to allow the p_example role to select on the example table, we would use GRANT SELECT ON example TO p_example;.
    ```SQL
    GRANT role TO other_role;
    ```
    
    is used to assign one role to another role; if we wanted to give g_example all the permissions of p_example, we would use GRANT p_example TO g_example;
    .

### Exercises
1. Let’s create a permission role first, for reading the customer table. So that it’s easy to tell what type of role it is, we’ll call it p_customers_read.
2. We’re created a permission role, but it doesn’t actually do anything yet! Let’s fix this by using the GRANT command.

    We want to give p_customers_read permission to SELECT items in the customers table.
3. Create a role that will serve as a group for employees. Call the role g_employees.
4. We want to give the g_employees group permission to READ from the customers table.

    We already created a permission for this, so we just need to grant it to the group.
5. Let’s make sure everything is working!

    Create an example user account and add it to the employees group. Like before, you’ll create a role, this time called u_example.

    Because this is an account that actually logs in, we’ll want to add WITH LOGIN to the end of the CREATE ROLE command.
6. Now, add u_example to the g_employees group.
7. Finally, let’s implement some more default-deny behavior.

    We can REVOKE public permissions, so that users require the p_customers_read permission to read the customers table:
    ```SQL
    REVOKE SELECT ON customers FROM PUBLIC;
    ```

`Commands ranned in CLI`
```SQL
-- 1.
CREATE ROLE p_customers_read;

-- 2.
GRANT SELECT ON customers TO p_customers_read;

-- 3.
CREATE ROLE g_employees;

-- 4.
GRANT p_customers_read TO g_employees;

-- 5.
CREATE ROLE u_example WITH LOGIN;

-- 6.
GRANT g_employees TO u_example;

-- 7.
REVOKE SELECT ON customers FROM PUBLIC;

```

## Server Configuration
Slowly, you’re fixing Carcademy’s broken authentication and access control. Your last stop is a configuration file called postgresql.conf, in order to make some final tweaks to improve the overall security of the Postgres server. Some of the changes will enforce secure authentication, while others will make it more difficult for an attacker to target the server using automated tools.

Automated tools are widely used by hackers to scan targets and determine what software they are running. Scanning too much or too quickly greatly increases the risk of detection, so the tools are often configured to scan specific ports that are widely used, such as 21, 22, 80, etc…

We’ll be changing three parameters in this exercise:
* The listen_addresses parameter controls what IP addresses are allowed to connect to the server. An IP address that isn’t allowed to connect won’t even be able to try to authenticate. Setting this to '*' allows connections from any address to try and authenticate, but this is generally a bad idea! This parameter supports [CIDR notation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classless_Inter-Domain_Routing#:~:text=CIDR%20notation%20is%20a%20compact,bits%20in%20the%20network%20mask.), and can have multiple entries separate by commas.
* The port parameter is the port the Postgres server listens on. Port numbers 49152—65535 aren’t reserved by any software, so a port in this range usually doesn’t conflict with any other software.
* The ssl parameter determines whether or not the server will support SSL connections. In a real environment, the server also needs to be provided with the appropriate certificate and key.

### Exercises
1. Add the owner’s IP address, 104.20.25.250, to the listen addresses parameter.
2. Set the port parameter to 54831.
3. This server needs to enable SSL.

    Set the ssl parameter to on.

`postgressql.conf`
```
# some_other_configuration = some_values
listen_addresses = 'localhost, 104.20.25.250'
port = 54831
ssl = on
```
