# Managing Environment Variables, API Keys, and Files in Node.js

# Managing Environment Variables, API Keys, and Files in Node.js

## Environment Variables
An environment variable is no different than other variables we use while programming. It is used to store information we want to reference in a program. The only difference is that it’s a key-value pair whose value is set and stored outside a program, usually by the operating system or the production environment. Environment variables can prevent the secret development keys and passwords from getting out. They also reward us with more efficient coding in the long run. Take a look at some example environment variables below:
```
DB_HOST=123.45.678.90
DB_USER=root
DB_PASS=123456
API_KEY=V3rYPubl1cK3y
```

Be wary that environment variables are not recommended for every situation because they are global variables. On a large-scale application, global variables can be hard to keep track of. We will introduce the main use cases and best practices for environment variables.

## Environment Variables vs Config Variables
Environment variables and config variables share some similarities; choosing one comes down to the developer’s preference and environment. While a [config.json](https://www.npmjs.com/package/config.json) file allows us to have a greater variety of data types and complex data structures, the data in a .env file is generally more intelligible. Moreover, some online hosting platforms natively support environment variables. At the end of the day, they both accomplish the same purpose: keeping your information secure. In this lesson, however, we will talk exclusively about environment variables.

## Import Environment Variables using dotenv
Node.js stores all the environment variables into a global variable called process.env. We can use a npm package called dotenv to load all our environment variables from .env to process.env, allowing us to access them in our program.

You’d normally have to use the command npm install dotenv to install the dotenv package. Since we already have it installed, we will skip this step. To load the environment variables from .env, we can do this in our JavaScript file:
```JS
// Imports the npm package
import dotenv from "dotenv"; 
// Loads environment variables into process.env
dotenv.config(); 
```

We can then use the process.env variable to access all the environment variables available to us. Note that all environment variables will be imported as strings.
```JS
// Prints “Sonia Kaur”
console.log(process.env.ADMIN_NAME); 
// Prints “admin#1337”
console.log(process.env.ADMIN_USERNAME); 
```

In the next couple of exercises, we will go over two common use cases for environment variables: database credentials and API keys.

## .gitignore
We need to handle .env files with care and uploading them to a public repository is not the way to go. It’s easy to accidentally stage our .env file and push it to our remote Github repository.

This is where we can take advantage of .gitignore. .gitignore is a plain text file just like .env. In .gitignore, each line corresponds to a file, directory, or pattern we would like to ignore when staging. This means those files won’t be pushed to our GitHub repository where other developers might see them.

In .gitignore, we can add the name of the file we’d like to ignore like so:
```
# Windows OS file
thumbs.db
 
# macOS OS metafile
.DS_Store
```

We can ignore directories the same way. Writing node_modules/ in .gitignore will ignore all directories with the name, node_modules, and all subdirectories and files inside them. The forward slash / is necessary to just ignore directories. Otherwise, it will ignore files named node_modules as well.

We can also use regular expression patterns in .gitignore to ignore types of files.

In the next exercise, we will learn how to properly share our projects containing environment variables with others.

## Environment Variables and Project Collaboration
What can we do if we are working as part of a team or we want to share our project with others without revealing the sensitive information in our environment variables?

The best practice here is to include a sample .env file in the public repository as a template for the next person. This would usually be named sample.env or example.env. This file contains the names of all the environment variables we need to run a project but their values are empty.

Writing comments to explain each variable is recommended and it helps to group related variables. Other developers can simply add their credentials and rename this file to .env. Take a look at the example.env file in the workspace.

### Exercises
`example.env`
```
# Database Information
DB_USER=
DB_PASS=

# Stocks API Key
API_KEY=
```

`README.md`
```MD
## Environment variables
The following variables are required to run the program.
- DB_USER
- DB_PASS
- API_KEY

`DB_USER` and `DB_PASS` can be obtained from your local system administrator.\
`API_KEY` is required to fetch data from the stock market. Go to <SOME_WEBSITE_URL> to register an account and follow the instructions to get an API key.
```
