# General Asynchronous Programming Concepts

Synchronous actions happen sequentially, one after the other. Whereas, asynchronous actions can happen at the same without one action blocking the other.

# Introduction to Asynchronous JavaScript

## JavaScript and Asynchronous Code
JavaScript is a single-threaded language. This means it has a single thread that can carry out one task at a time. However, Javascript has what is known as the event loop, a specific design that allows it to perform asynchronous tasks even while only using a single thread (more on this later!). Let’s examine some examples of asynchronous code in Javascript!

### Asynchronous Callbacks
One common example of asynchronicity in JavaScript is the use of asynchronous callbacks. This is a type of callback function that executes after a specific condition is met and runs concurrently to any other code currently running. Let’s look at an example:
```JS
easterEgg.addEventListener('click', () => {
  console.log('Up, Up, Down, Down, Left, Right, Left, Right, B, A');
});
```

In the code above, the function passed as the second argument of .addEventListener() is an asynchronous callback — this function doesn’t execute until the easterEgg is clicked.

### setTimeout
In addition to asynchronous callbacks, JavaScript provides a handful of built-in functions that can perform tasks asynchronously. One function that is commonly used is the [setTimeout()](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/setTimeout) function.

With setTimeout() we can write code that tells our JavaScript program to wait a minimum amount of time before executing its callback function. Take a look at this example:
```JS
setTimeout(() => {
  console.log('Delay the printing of this string, please.');
}, 1000);
```

Notice that setTimeout() takes 2 arguments, a callback function and a number specifying how long to wait before executing the function. In the example above, the function will print 'Delay the printing of this string, please.' after 1000 milliseconds (or 1 second) have passed.

Since setTimeout() is non-blocking, we can be executing multiple lines of code at the same time! . Imagine if we had a program like this:
```JS
setTimeout(() => {
  console.log('Delay the printing of this string, please.');
}, 1000);
console.log('Doing important stuff.');
console.log('Still doing important stuff.'); 
```

Which outputs:
```JS
'Doing important stuff.'
'Still doing important stuff.' 
'Delay the printing of this string, please.'
```

If we take a closer look at the output, we’ll see that our setTimeout()‘s callback function didn’t execute until after our other very important console.log() statements were executed.

In web development, this means we can write code to wait for an event to trigger all while a user goes on interacting with our app. One such example could be if a user goes to a shopping site and gets notified that an item is up for sale and only for a limited time. Our asynchronous code could allow the user to interact with our site and when the sale timer expires, our code will remove the sale item.

### setInterval()
Another common built-in function is setInterval() which also takes a callback function and a number specifying how often the callback function should execute. For example:
```JS
setInterval(() => {
  alert('Are you paying attention???')
}, 300000)
```

The setInterval() would call the alert() function and show a pop-up message of 'Are you paying attention???' every 300000 milliseconds (or 5 minutes). Note: Please don’t actually do this in your apps, thank you.

While we wait for our alert to chime in every 5 minutes, our users could still use our app! Note: Again, please don’t do this.

With setInterval(), we can programmatically create an alarm, a countdown timer, set the frequency of an animation, and so much more!
