# Database Triggers

## What is a trigger?
According to Wikipedia, “a [database trigger](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Database_trigger) is procedural code that is automatically executed in response to certain events on a particular table or view in a database. The trigger is mostly used for maintaining the integrity of the information on the database.”

In practical terms, what does that do for you though? What that means is that when you want something to happen every time someone makes a specific change to a table or view, a trigger is placed on that table or view. That trigger will call a function when the conditions for the trigger are met.

You may be asking yourself, why would you want to have something happen without the caller specifically asking for it and possibly happening without their knowledge? In short, adding a trigger saves people from forgetting to do that action, and ensures consistent rules are applied.

Of course, nothing comes without a cost. Triggers have overhead and there might be times when you don’t want it to fire and you have to work around it. But if properly designed, these situations should be rare — often in very specific situations where there is a valid reason to make the exception.

## How are Triggers Activated?
Now that you have been introduced to the concept, let’s get our hands dirty and dive right in to creating our first trigger! Triggers are very customizable. You have control over when they get called, when they run, along with what happens when they are called. For now we will keep things simple and go with a trigger that calls a function when a table is updated.
```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER <trigger_name>
  BEFORE UPDATE ON <table_name>
  FOR EACH ROW
  EXECUTE PROCEDURE<function>;
```

As a note here, you may see newer versions of PostgreSQL use EXECUTE FUNCTION rather than EXECUTE PROCEDURE. These are logically equivalent and both call a trigger function (we will refer to this as calling a function throughout the lesson) but you should be aware that we will be using EXECUTE PROCEDURE for our triggers. If you are working on another system you might need to switch to EXECUTE FUNCTION.

For a specific example, say you had your own trigger function you (or someone else) created called check_account_update() that might be written like
```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION check_account_update() RETURNS TRIGGER AS $$
  BEGIN
    NEW.active:= 1;
    RETURN NEW;
  END;
$$ LANGUAGE PLPGSQL;
```

You could set this function as the target of your trigger like this:
```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER check_update
  BEFORE UPDATE ON accounts
  FOR EACH ROW
  EXECUTE PROCEDURE check_account_update();
```

So in this case, no matter what your UPDATE statement did to the accounts table, the modified rows would have their active column set to 1 (presumably indicating true).

You are not limited to setting a trigger only on an UPDATE, it can be set for UPDATE, INSERT, DELETE and TRUNCATE.

### EXERCISE
1. Using the examples, create a trigger on the table customers called insert_trigger that will call the function insert_function() that will be activated on an INSERT statement for that table.

    Note that we’ve written insert_function() behind the scenes.
2. Now to test your new trigger, start with doing a SELECT * on the customers table.
3. Insert a record into the customers table. The only required fields are first_name and last_name, so to keep things simple on your insert use first_name = John and last_name = Doe.
4. Run your select statement again after the insert and take note that more than what you inserted has changed (specifically notice last_name). This is due to the trigger you created being called when you did your insert.

    What do you think the insert_function() that we wrote behind the scenes does? Check out the hint to see that function.
```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER insert_trigger
  BEFORE INSERT ON customers
  FOR EACH ROW
  EXECUTE PROCEDURE insert_function();

SELECT * FROM customers;

INSERT INTO customers (first_name, last_name)
VALUES ('John', 'Doe');

SELECT * FROM customers;
```

`Trigger`
```SQL
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION insert_function() RETURNS TRIGGER AS $$
    BEGIN
        NEW.last_name := 'UNKOWN';
        RETURN NEW;
    END;
$$ LANGUAGE PLPGSQL;
```

## When is a Trigger Activated?
Let’s take a look at when a trigger can be activated in relation to the query that activates it. There are two common options: BEFORE and AFTER.

We have already used BEFORE — this calls your trigger before the query that fired the trigger runs, allowing you to apply the actions in the function previous to the query. Specifically letting you modify the row that is being modified when using an INSERT or UPDATE, like we did in the previous lesson.

AFTER occurs once the query finishes its work. This allows your trigger to activate once the query it was activated by has finished its work. This will not let you modify the row that is being modified as the process has already finished. This is quite useful for logging purposes, such as inserting into an audit table to track who did a change and when.

### Exercise
1. Start by SELECT * on customers table so we can confirm the starting state of our data. Also do an ORDER BY on customer_id to ensure ease of comparison at the end.
2. Let’s put into practice the example and create an AFTER trigger. Create one for the customers that will fire on UPDATE calling log_customers_change(). Name this trigger you are creating after_trigger.

    log_customers_change() is a function that we wrote behind the scenes that will log the time a change is made to the customers table.
3. Let’s activate our trigger by writing an UPDATE. Let’s say the database had a customer’s age wrong. Run an UPDATE command on the customers table to increase the age (years_old) by 10 of the customer with customer_id = 1.
4. Do a final SELECT * on customers table, notice what happened. Don’t forget to ORDER BY on customer_id. Add another SELECT * on customers_log so you can see the log that was created on your change.

    As a note, the name of the change is the user id given in this tool (ccuser). In a production environment, you would have more specific user information on who made the change.
```SQL
SELECT * FROM customers
ORDER BY customer_id;

CREATE TRIGGER after_trigger
  AFTER UPDATE ON customers
  FOR EACH ROW
  EXECUTE PROCEDURE log_customers_change();

UPDATE customers
SET years_old = years_old + 10
WHERE customer_id = 1;

SELECT * FROM customers
ORDER BY customer_id;
SELECT * FROM customers_log;
```

## What Records are modified by a Trigger?
Let’s finally look into that FOR EACH ROW part of our trigger. When using FOR EACH ROW, the trigger will fire and call the function for every row that is impacted by the related query. The other option is to have it set to FOR EACH STATEMENT. FOR EACH STATEMENT calls the function in the trigger once for each query, not for each record.

This option might seem simplistic but depending on the situation, it could have large impacts on efficiency and data integrity. For instance, let’s say you want to put in a new column on all your sales records to account for inflation. You have their historical order_value but now you want order_value_inflation_adjusted. Depending on your table, this could be thousands or millions of records. If you have a trigger set as FOR EACH ROW and calls a small function, this could add up fast.

Aside from speed consideration, there are very real possible logical differences. Say for instance your function is tracking the number of modifications for audit purposes. If you use FOR EACH ROW and deleted 10 records, your counter at the end would be 10 since it would increment your counter once for every row deleted. However, if your function was set to FOR EACH STATEMENT then your counter would be 1 at the end since it would only be called once your query finished. This was a basic example for illustration, but if you have cases where rows depend on each other, then this option can have a very real logical impact.

### EXERCISE
1. Start by SELECT * on customers table so we can confirm the starting state of our data.
2. Create a trigger called each_statement_trigger for the customers table that calls a function statement_function() on AFTER UPDATE. This time, however, use FOR EACH STATEMENT rather than FOR EACH ROW. This will make the trigger fire only once per query no matter how many rows you update.

    statement_function() will insert a new row into our customers table. We’ll soon see this in action once we activate our trigger.
3. Let’s active the trigger you just created to see what happens when we use FOR EACH STATEMENT. Let’s say someone forget to update everyone’s ages last year. Let’s fix that by updating all of the records in your customers table by adding 1 to the years_old column.
4. Do a final SELECT * on the customers table and notice what happened.

    A new record is created by the trigger! This is a great example of an audit trail. Normally this would go into a separate table identifying who did the change and when, but for simplicity, we simply added a dummy row to this table to show what can happen.
5. As a bonus (we won’t grade your code), try changing the FOR EACH STATEMENT to a FOR EACH ROW and run the script again and notice the change to the customers table. Why did this happen?

    | customer_id | first_name | last_name |
    | ----------- | ---------- | --------- |
    | 1 | Edward | Lewis |
    | 2 | Frances | Campbell |
    | 3 | Dennis | Hall |
    | 4 | statement | run |

```SQL
SELECT * FROM customers;

CREATE TRIGGER each_statement_trigger
  AFTER UPDATE ON customers
  FOR EACH STATEMENT
  EXECUTE PROCEDURE statement_function();

UPDATE customers
SET years_old = years_old + 1;

SELECT * FROM customers;
```

## Can I focus my Triggers?
You will be happy to find out that you can use a WHEN clause to filter when a trigger calls its related function.

For example, let’s say you want to create a trigger on your clients table that marks which clients are your highest spenders. This trigger would be dependent on the business logic on what a high spender is. For example, when total spending gets higher than X you could update the high spenders flag for that client. Similarly, if a client drops below X you could mark that they are no longer considered a high spender.

As a note, with the WHEN clause, you can use NEW and OLD to get records from the table before and after the query. Logically, INSERT can not refer to OLD (nothing existed before the insert) and DELETE can not refer to NEW (nothing exists after the delete).

For example the INSERT triggers might look like:
```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER insert_trigger_high
BEFORE INSERT ON clients
FOR EACH ROW
WHEN (NEW.total_spent >= 1000)
EXECUTE PROCEDURE high_spender();
```

and
```SQL
CREATE TRIGGER insert_trigger_low
BEFORE INSERT ON clients
FOR EACH ROW
WHEN (NEW.total_spent < 1000)
EXECUTE PROCEDURE not_a_high_spender();
```

### EXERCISE
1. Using the examples as a template, create TWO update triggers for the same table (clients). Name the triggers update_trigger_high and update_trigger_low, both set to BEFORE UPDATE and FOR EACH ROW. For the high spender set the logic to when the total_spent is >= 1000 it calls set_high_spender(). For the low spender set its logic to when the total_spent is less than 1000 it calls set_low_spender().

    Note: we have been using the customers table, but now we are mixing it up and using a clients table.
2. Do a SELECT * on the clients. To make comparisons easier set ORDER BY client_id.
3. Now to test our triggers, write two update statements. For the first, set the total_spent = 5000 where last_name = 'Campbell'. For the second one, set total_spent = 100 where `last_name = ‘Lewis’.
4. Run your SELECT * on clients and ORDER BY client_id again after your UPDATE statement and notice the changes to the records. Specifically, take note of the high_spender column.

    The trigger altered the record beyond what was specified in the UPDATE statement you wrote. In practice, you could (and probably should) do this logic in the function itself, letting it decide when to set the high spender to on or off, but this served as a good example of how to use a WHEN clause to limit when a trigger would fire.
```SQL
-- 1.
CREATE TRIGGER update_trigger_high
BEFORE UPDATE ON clients
FOR EACH ROW
WHEN (NEW.total_spent >= 1000)
EXECUTE PROCEDURE set_high_spender();

CREATE TRIGGER update_trigger_low
BEFORE UPDATE ON clients
FOR EACH ROW
WHEN (NEW.total_spent < 1000)
EXECUTE PROCEDURE set_low_spender();

-- 2.
SELECT * FROM clients
ORDER BY client_id;

-- 3.
UPDATE clients
SET total_spent = 5000
WHERE last_name = 'Campbell';
UPDATE clients
SET total_spent = 100
WHERE last_name = 'Lewis';

-- 4.
SELECT * FROM clients
ORDER BY client_id;
```

| client_id | high_spender | first_name | last_name | total_spent |
| --------- | ------------ | ---------- | --------- | ----------- |
| 1 | 1 | Edward | Lewis | 10000 |
| 2 | 0 | Frances | Campbell | 0 |
| 3 | 0 | Dennis | Hall | 750 |

| client_id | high_spender | first_name | last_name | total_spent |
| --------- | ------------ | ---------- | --------- | ----------- |
| 1 | 0 | Edward | Lewis | 100 |
| 2 | 1 | Frances | Campbell | 5000 |
| 3 | 0 | Dennis | Hall | 750 |

## Things to consider
Now that we have covered the basic structure of triggers, let us cover some of the nuances to keep in mind. For instance, in PostgreSQL, multiple triggers of the same kind can exist on the same table. If a statement causes multiple triggers to fire, they are triggered in alphabetical order. We have seen this by implication in our previous exercise where we had more than one trigger for UPDATE and INSERT. In that example, because of the logic of the WHERE clauses, only one trigger called its function, but with different WHERE clause logic, both could have been fired. We will play around with this idea in more detail in the exercises.

Another point to be aware of is that in PostgreSQL, since SELECT statements do not modify rows, no trigger can be set on a SELECT statement.

Finally, let’s consider the concept that one SQL command can trigger more than one kind of trigger. For example, an INSERT can fire a trigger that calls a function that updates another record(s), firing an UPDATE trigger.

Let’s look at a hypothetical example on how this might work. Say you have a DELETE trigger on your customers table. The function associated with this trigger inserts a record into the customers_deleted table. Additionally, the customers_deleted table has an INSERT trigger on it. So when this record is inserted it calls its associated function for the trigger that updates a record in the security table setting the date for next review due to the current date.

### EXERCISE
1. Create two update triggers, one called update_alpha that calls the function update_first() and the other trigger call update_bravo which calls update_second(). Both on the orders table, both set for BEFORE UPDATE and FOR EACH ROW.

    update_first() and update_second() are two functions we wrote that will add some text to the notes column of our table. We’re going to investigate the order in which these notes are written. Remember, the order is based on the name of the triggers in this case.
2. Run a SELECT * FROM orders; to see the current state of the table. To help you with verification of results include ORDER BY order_id.
3. UPDATE the record for order 1234 with quantity of 5.
4. Run your select statement again. Notice the order of the string in the notes. These were added in the order they were run by the triggers. In the real world, you can make much more complex sequences, but this gives you the foundation to build upon.
5. BONUS: Try renaming the triggers so the trigger associated with the update_first() function runs second. Notice the change to the output to confirm the triggers are running alphabetically.
```SQL
-- 1.
CREATE TRIGGER update_alpha
BEFORE UPDATE ON orders
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE PROCEDURE update_first();

CREATE TRIGGER update_bravo
BEFORE UPDATE ON orders
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE PROCEDURE update_second();

-- 2.
SELECT * FROM orders
ORDER BY order_id;

-- 3.
UPDATE orders
SET quantity = 5
WHERE order_id = 1234;

-- 4.
SELECT * FROM orders
ORDER BY order_id;
```

| order_id | quantity | notes |
| -------- | -------- | ----- |
| 1234 | 50 | |
| 4321 | 1 | |
| 5917 | 27 | |
| order_id | quantity | notes |
| -------- | -------- | ----- |
| 1234 | 5 | update_first ran update_second ran |
| 4321 | 1 | |
| 5917 | 27 | |

## 