# Intro to Tech Interview
# Acing the Technical Interview

## What is a Technical Interview?

Technical interviews are a part of the hiring process for tech professionals. This process also includes phone screenings and in-person interviews, but the assignments you complete during technical interviews help interviewers evaluate your skills.

Assignments vary by company, but common tasks include:
* Debugging existing code
* Building a small project
* Adding a feature to an existing code base
* Explaining the design and architecture of a technical problem

While you’ll likely be asked to solve a problem, don’t worry too much about getting it right. Interviewers are typically more interested in your thought process than your solution.

## Ask Questions Leading Up to Your Interview

By the time you have your technical interview, you’ve probably already spoken with the company’s recruiter or hiring manager. Feel free to ask them questions about what you should expect or the technologies used by the team you’ll be joining.

## Master Your Programming Languages

You can usually use your preferred programming language for the technical interview, and knowing its ins and outs will help you make a good impression.

Mastering your programming language will allow you to give the assignment your full attention instead of wasting time figuring out syntax. Plus, you might get the chance to wow your interviewer with a lesser-known feature or method.

It’s also worth taking the time to learn data structures and algorithms. Not only will this make your coding more efficient, but it’ll also deepen your understanding of the concepts employed in your technical interview.

## Practice With Projects and Coding Challenges

Theoretical knowledge will only take you so far. Completing coding challenges and projects will help instill the skills you’ll use in your new career. Plus, the more you practice, the faster you’ll become. Imagine how impressed your interviewer will be when you’ve efficiently solved the problem in half of the allotted time.

You could also practice with technical interview courses. Our Technical Interview Practice with Python, Java, and JavaScript courses cover advanced knowledge and skills, with practice problems to help you nail your next interview.

## Memorize a Story That Illustrates Your Skill

At some point during your technical interview, you may be asked about your prior experience. Having a story readily available will help illustrate your familiarity with the knowledge and skills required for the position.

Use the notes you took while completing a project to create an outline and commit it to memory. Then, test it out on people. Share the story with your friends until you’re able to tell it without any stammering or pauses. This will help you sound confident during your technical interview, and being able to succinctly describe the problems you encountered and your solutions will demonstrate your expertise.

## Understand the Problem

Taking the time to understand the problem will make or break your interview. Too often, candidates rush in and start coding. Don’t be afraid to talk through it aloud.

Also, feel free to ask questions. It’s better to clarify any confusion at the beginning than when you’re halfway through your solution. Inquire about edge cases, intended program behaviors, error handling — anything that might occur to you. Not only will this show your critical thinking skills, but it’ll also illustrate your openness to feedback.

## Explain Your Approach

Again, interviewers are primarily concerned with your thought process. Here’s your chance to give them a look.

Back in December, we spoke with Daniel Chae, a programmer and data analyst from Los Angeles. While discussing the hiring process, Daniel stressed the importance of explaining your approach in technical interviews. He breaks it down into two steps:
* Identifying your core goal
* Generating a step by step process you can explain aloud

Explaining your approach allows interviewers to better understand how you go about tackling a problem. Daniel describes how, despite his solution not being perfect, explaining his approach gave him a leg up in a technical interview with Google.

Don’t stop explaining, even when you run into a problem. Talking through it will help you organize your thoughts and find a solution. Plus, your interviewer is much more likely to give you a hand if you’re already engaged in conversation.

## Optimize Your Solution

Going back to optimize your solution is a great way to display your attention to detail. Tidy up your code. Make sure you’re not using complicated functions for a problem that can be solved with your language’s basic features. If you’re familiar with Big O notation, discuss it with your interviewer.

## Technical Interview Questions and Answers
* [7 HTML interview questions to practice](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/blog/html-interview-questions/?utm_source=ccblog&utm_medium=ccblog&utm_campaign=ccblog&utm_content=technical_interview_guide_blog)
* [7 top CSS interview questions to practice](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/blog/css-interview-questions/?utm_source=ccblog&utm_medium=ccblog&utm_campaign=ccblog&utm_content=technical_interview_guide_blog)
* [7 JavaScript interview questions to practice](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/blog/javascript-interview-questions/?utm_source=ccblog&utm_medium=ccblog&utm_campaign=ccblog&utm_content=technical_interview_guide_blog)
