# Asymptotic Notation
# Asymptotic Notation: JavaScript

## Finding the Maximum Value in a Linked List

Now that we can analyze the runtime of a function, let’s see take a look at the runtime of data structures.

We often search through data structures to find a specific value. In this exercise, you will complete a function that finds the maximum value of a linked list, and you will also analyze the runtime of your function.

The function, findMax(), takes in list as an input. The function should return the maximum value in the linked list.
Fill in the Code
```JS
// Fill in the findMax() function such that you return the maximum value in list by only traversing it once.
function findMax(list) {
  let current = list.head;
  let max = current.data;
  while (current.getNextNode() !== null) {
    current = current.getNextNode();
    let val = current.data;
    if (val > max) {
      max = val;
    }
  }
  return max;
}
```
```
Since you only traversed the list once to find the maximum value, what is the big O runtime of the findMax() function?

n

Yes! The big O runtime is n since you iterate through the list one time.
```

## Sorting a Linked List
We also often sort data structures in order to organize the values stored in them. In this exercise, you will sort a linked list from the smallest value to the largest value.

There are many ways to sort a linked list, but one way is as follows:
* Instantiate a new linked list
* Find the maximum value of the linked list input
* Insert the maximum to the beginning of the new linked list
* Remove the maximum value from the linked list input
* Repeat steps 2-4 until the linked list input is empty
* Return the new linked list
```JS
// Fill in the sortLinkedList() function such that you return a new linked list that is sorted from smallest to largest. The function uses findMax() from above to return the largest element in the list.
function sortLinkedList(list) {
  let newList = new LinkedList();
  while (list.head !== null) {
    let currentMax = findMax(list);
    list.remove(currentMax);
    newList.addToHead(currentMax);
  }
  return newList;
}
```
```
What is the big O runtime? Remember that findMax() is called within the sortLinkedList() function. (For the sake of this function, assume that .remove() has a big O runtime of 1.)

n^2

Yes! Since there are nested while loops (one in findMax() and one in sortLinkedList()), the big O runtime is n^2.
```

## Stack Runtimes vs Queue Runtimes
In addition to analyzing the runtimes of various data structures, it is also important to compare the runtimes of different data structures.

We will compare the runtimes of retrieving the first value added to a queue to the runtime of retrieving the first value added to a stack.

### Removing the First Value Added to a Queue
A queue is a FIFO (first in, first out) data structure, which means that the first element added to it, will always be the first element removed from it. Removing this element does not require you to iterate through the queue.

### Removing the First Value Added to a Stack
On the other hand, a stack is a FILO (first in, last out) data structure. This means that the first element added will be the last element removed. Removing this element will require you to iterate through the stack, all the way to the bottom.

```
The big O runtime of removing the first element added to a Queue is _____, and the big O runtime of removing the first element added to a Stack is _____. 

O(1), O(n)

Yes! Since the element will be at the head of the queue, removing it is one step, so it is O(1). On the other hand, since the element will be at the bottom of the stack, removing it requires iterating through the whole stack, so it is
```

While finding the first value added to a queue has a better big O runtime than doing so in a stack, consider finding the last value added. In a queue, we will have to iterate through the entire queue to retrieve the element at the end. This will be a big O runtime of O(n). On the other hand, the last value added to a stack is the value at the top of the stack, so removing it will just be a big O runtime of O(1).

## Hash Map Runtimes vs Linked List Runtimes
Similarly, let’s compare the runtimes of searching for a particular element in a linked list and in a hash map.

### Retrieving an Element from a Linked List
To find an element in a linked list, we will have to search through the entire list to see if the element is there. Refer to the findMax() function we looked at above for an example. Iterating through the list means that this process has a big O runtime of O(n).

### Retrieving an Element from a Hash Map
Retrieving an element from a hash map is more efficient, due to its structure. Hash maps store information using key-value pairs, which means that every value is linked to a unique key. In order to find the value from the key, it uses the hash function, which has a big O runtime of O(1). If you don’t have to search through the entire data structure, retrieving an element from a hash map is faster than retrieving an element from a linked list.

However, there is the possibility that the element you are looking for is not at the spot that you expect it to be. This happens when two keys have the same hash. There are a few ways hash maps resolve this issue, including separate chaining and open addressing.

### Separate Chaining
One way to solve hash map collisions is to create a linked list at the array index where the collision occurred. All elements that hash to the same index will be in that list. This means that to find an element in a hash map that uses separate chaining, you must first find the correct index, and then search through the list at that index (if there is more than one element).
```
Given the multiple steps required to retrieve an element from a hash map that uses separate chaining, what is the big O runtime of that retrieval?

n

Yes! The worst case would be that all elements in the hash map hashed to the same index and are in one linked list with the element you’re looking for at the end of the list. To find it, you would have to iterate through the list, which means the big O runtime is O(n)
```

### Open Addressing
Another way to solve hash map collisions is to simply move down the array until you find an open index, and place the element there. This is a type of open addressing that is called linear probing. When retrieving an element from a hash map that uses linear probing, the worst case would be if the element hashes to the first index, but is actually at the last index. Since you would have to search through the entire array, the big O runtime for retrieving an element from this kind of hash map is O(n).
