# Event Handler Registration
You’re doing great! Now it’s time to dive into using event handler functions to create interactivity.

Using the .addEventListener() method, we can have a DOM element listen for a specific event and execute a block of code when the event is detected. The DOM element that listens for an event is called the event target and the block of code that runs when the event happens is called the event handler.

Let’s take a look at the code below:

let eventTarget = document.getElementById('targetElement');
```JS
eventTarget.addEventListener('click', function() {
  // this block of code will run when click event happens on eventTarget element
});
```

Let’s break this down!
* We selected our event target from the DOM using document.getElementById('targetElement').
* We used the .addEventListener() method on the eventTarget DOM element.
* The .addEventListener() method takes two arguments: an event name in string format and an event handler function. We will learn about different values we can use as event names in a later lesson.
* In this example, we used the 'click' event, which fires when the user clicks on eventTarget.
* The code block in the event handler function will execute when the 'click' event is detected.

Instead of using an anonymous function as the event handler, it’s best practice to create a named event handler function. Your code will remain organized and reusable this way, even if your code gets complex. Check out the syntax:
```JS
function eventHandlerFunction() {
  // this block of code will run when click event happens
}
eventTarget.addEventListener('click', eventHandlerFunction);
```

The named function eventHandlerFunction is passed as the second argument of the .addEventListener() method instead of defining an anonymous function within the method!

# Adding Event Handlers
We looked at registering event handlers using the .addEventListener() method, but there is also another way!

Event Handlers can also be registered by setting an .onevent property on a DOM element (event target). The pattern for registering a specific event is to append an element with .on followed by the lowercased event type name. For instance, if we want to register a click event with this pattern, we would write:
```JS
eventTarget.onclick = eventHandlerFunction;
```

Here, we give the DOM element eventTarget the .onclick property and set its value as the event handler function eventHandlerFunction.

It’s important to know that this .onevent property and .addEventListener() will both register event listeners. With .onevent, it allows for one event handler function to be attached to the event target. However, with the .addEventListener() method , we can add multiple event handler functions. In the later exercises, we’ll be using the .addEventListener() syntax, but we wanted to also introduce the .onevent syntax because both are widely used.

# Removing Event Handlers
The .removeEventListener() method is used to reverse the .addEventListener() method. This method stops the event target from “listening” for an event to fire when it no longer needs to. .removeEventListener() also takes two arguments:
1. The event type as a string
2. The event handler function

Check out the syntax of a .removeEventListener() method with a click event:
```JS
eventTarget.removeEventListener('click', eventHandlerFunction);
```

Because there can be multiple event handler functions associated with a particular event, .removeEventListener() needs both the exact event type name and the name of the event handler you want to remove. If .addEventListener() was provided an anonymous function, then that event listener cannot be removed.

# Event Object Properties
JavaScript stores events as Event objects with their related data and functionalities as properties and methods. When an event is triggered, the event object can be passed as an argument to the event handler function.
```JS
function eventHandlerFunction(event){
   console.log(event.timeStamp);
}
 
eventTarget.addEventListener('click', eventHandlerFunction);
```

In the example above, when the 'click' event is triggered on the eventTarget, the eventHandlerFunction receives event, the Event object, which has information related to the 'click' event. Then, we log the time it took for the event to be triggered since the document was loaded by accessing the .timeStamp property of the event object.

There are pre-determined properties associated with event objects. You can call these properties to see information about the event, for example:
* the .target property to reference the element that the event is registered to.
* the .type property to access the name of the event.
* the .timeStamp property to access the number of milliseconds that passed since the document loaded and the event was triggered.

# Event Types
Beyond the click event, there are all types of DOM events that can fire in a browser! It’s important to know most events in the DOM take place without being noticed because there are no event handlers connected to them.

It’s also important to know some registered events don’t depend on user interactions to fire. For instance, the load event fires after website files completely load in the browser.

Browsers can fire many other events without a user — you can check out a list of events on the [MDN Events Reference](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Events) page.

Many events need user interaction with the DOM to fire. One user interaction event you’ve become familiar with is the click event. A click event fires when the user presses and releases a mouse button on an element in the DOM.
